Preface

China's rise to economic(经济的) superpower(超级大国) surely ranks among the most extraordinary stories in history. In barely(仅仅) three decades(十年), this once backward, insular(孤立的) country has moved hundreds of millions of people out of poverty(贫困) while turning itself into the world's second-biggest economy(经济). I can think of no country that has grown so much so quickly. The U.S.'s rise to industrial(工业的) supremacy(霸权) after the Civil War comes to mind, but the Chinese may have already outstripped our great run, and they're not done yet. In the not-too-distant future, they are likely to surpass(超越) us as the world's biggest economy, knocking us off a perch(高位) we've occupied(占据) for nearly 150 years.

China's transformation(转化) has been as spectacular(壮观的) as it has been swift. Its spanking-new skyscrapers, high-speed rail lines, and space-age airports stand in sharp contrast(对比) to our own increasingly creaky(发辗的) infrastructure(基础设施). One day we read of a Chinese entrepreneur's grandiose(宏伟的) plans to spend $50 billion to carve a passage through Nicaragua(尼加拉瓜) twice the size of the Panama Canal; the next we learn that a Chinese developer wants to buy a chunk(大块) of Iceland; then it's a manufacturer turned builder who hopes to erect(竖立) the world's tallest building, from prefabricated(预制构件的) units, in six months.

Today's China is a land of superlatives(最高级). It is home to the world's fastest supercomputer(巨型计算机), the biggest wind-power base, the longest sea bridge. It produces and uses nearly half of the world's coal, cement(水泥), iron ore, and steel; it consumes(消耗) 40 percent of the aluminum(铝) and copper. By one estimate(估计), China will soon account for nearly half of all the new buildings under construction on earth. Forty years ago most Americans wouldn't have imagined owing(未付的) China one red cent. Now it is the U.S.'s biggest creditor(债权人), owning just under $1.3 trillion(万亿) of our government's debt. It's enough to make the head spin―or for Americans to wonder how the world got turned upside(上部) down so fast.

Lately, however, China has become as much a source of concern(关系) as a source of awe. We find ourselves increasingly at cross purposes with an ever more competitive(竞争的) China as it flexes(屈曲) its newfound(新发现的) muscles(肌肉) in world markets and in bitter territorial(领土的) disputes(辩论) with its neighbors, while it seeks to challenge the U.S.-led order in Asia and in aspects(方面) of the system of global governance(管理) that has prevailed(盛行) since World War II. Its government appears unwilling or unable to prevent the cybertheft of intellectual(智力的) property from U.S. companies, and it is tightening(变紧) its grip(紧握) on Chinese society through an authoritarian(独裁主义的), one-party system of government that Americans don't understand and don't like.

Suspicion(怀疑) is a two-way street. Support for positive(积极的) relations with the United States is waning(渐亏的) among Chinese, growing numbers of whom believe that the U.S. and other countries want to impede(阻碍) their country's ascent(上升).

These developments threaten(威胁) to undermine(破坏) a relationship that, over more than four decades, has made substantial(大量的) contributions to economic growth, job creation(创造), and prosperity(繁荣) in both countries, while enhancing(提高) international security, not least by helping to fashion a peaceful end to the Cold War. Now, no shortage(缺乏) of Americans wonder: What do the Chinese really want? Why are they spending so much money on their military(军队)? Are they friends or enemies, trading partners or commercial(商业的) and geopolitical(地理政治学的) adversaries(对手)? In short, how do we deal with China?

This book is my attempt to address these concerns, through stories of my personal experience in working with the Chinese to get things done. I'm not a scholar or theorist(理论家). I don't read, write, or speak Chinese. I'm a businessman who brings a firsthand(直接的) knowledge of China and its corporate(法人的) and political leaders. I have gleaned(收集) this over more than 100 visits to the country and nearly 25 years of dealing with Chinese officials on commercial matters while at Goldman Sachs, on affairs of state and macroeconomic(宏观经济的) policy(政策) while U.S. secretary of the Treasury, and, nowadays, as head of the Paulson Institute, which promotes(促进) sustainable(可以忍受的) economic growth and a cleaner environment through greater cooperation(合作) between the U.S. and China. During that time I've had the opportunity(时机) to work closely with the most senior leaders of the last three administrations(管理) in China: Jiang Zemin and Zhu Rongji in the 1990s, Hu Jintao and Wen Jiabao in the early years of this century; and Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang today.

I write as an American who is deeply concerned about our country's standing in the world, the health of our economy and our environment, and the long-term prospects(前途) of our citizens. I take the view that all of these will benefit(利益) from active engagement(婚约) with China, that clear-eyed, constructive(建设性的) cooperation is the best way to advance our national interest. The Chinese are formidable(强大的) competitors. But we should not fear competition or shrink(收缩) from it.

I've held this conviction(定罪) for a long time. Within weeks of being sworn(发誓) in as Treasury secretary, I traveled to China to lay the groundwork(基础) for a new approach(方法) to our most important bilateral(双边的) relationship. Growth and economic reform(改革) were China's dominant(显性的) concerns, and I believed we could leverage(手段) our newly conceived(怀孕) Strategic Economic Dialogue to more effectively(有效地) manage many other pressing matters as well.

China's rise has spawned(产卵) a misconception(误解) that haunts(栖息地) the way some in both countries view our relationship: namely that the “China model” represents a better form of capitalism(资本主义) that is triumphing(获得胜利) even as the U.S. fades into decline(下降). In fact, China's leaders know only too well their country's vulnerabilities(易损性). Market reforms first began under Deng Xiaoping in 1978, but expanding(扩张) their reach and impact(影响) is more important than ever to the leadership(领导能力). For all of its success, China has a long way to go. More than 100 million of its people remain mired(陷于泥坑) in poverty. Its per-capita GDP ranks 80th in the world. That's just one place ahead of Iraq(伊拉克), and roughly one-eighth our level. The pace of China's prodigious(惊人的) growth is slowing down, making market reforms at once more urgent(紧急的) and more difficult to achieve. The country's 7.4 percent increase in GDP in 2014 came in under the official forecast for the first time in 16 years―and many experts expect further declines in the growth rate.

China needs to shift(移动) its $10 trillion economy from an overreliance(过度信赖) on exports(出口商品) and inefficient(无效率的) government investment(投资) in infrastructure, fueled by ominously(预兆的) rising debts at all levels of regional(地区的) government, toward increased domestic(国内的) consumption(消费) and a greater emphasis(重点) on service industries and high-end manufacturing. That's an enormous(庞大的) task, complicated(难懂的) by the fact that much of the economy remains under the thumb(拇指) of central planners, even after years of reform. Entrenched(确立) interests are resisting further changes. Meantime(其时), years of not-so-benign neglect(疏忽) have left the environment a near disaster that has sparked(发动) growing restiveness(难以驾御) among China's citizens.

And while there's much we must do to fix our own house, the U.S. remains the world's biggest, most advanced, and most dynamic(动态的) economy. China's leaders understand that to further their economic transformation they need the continued goodwill and cooperation of the U.S. and other countries that, in so many ways, continue to dominate(控制) the global economic system. They want greater access to our markets, our knowhow(诀窍), and our most advanced technologies.

The U.S.-China relationship will become better balanced and more secure(保护) and productive(能生产的) for both sides if each country makes some adjustments(调整). We Americans worry about China's increasingly militaristic(军国主义的) tone(语气); they view our “pivot(以…为中心旋转) to Asia” as a potential(潜在的) effort to contain their country's rise. We want the Chinese to open their markets to our companies, and we want them to abide(忍受) by the existing rules as they integrate(完整) further into the international system. China prefers to modify(修改) these rules and be treated with greater respect and deference(顺从) in the global arena(舞台).

There are some who believe that an immutable(不变的) law of history holds that conflict(冲突) is inevitable(必然的) when a rising power begins to bump(碰撞) up against an established(确定的) one. But no law is immutable. Choices matter. Lessons can be learned. And statesmen and stateswomen can, and do, make a difference.

I do not believe that anything is “inevitable” about the U.S.-China relationship, but there are real risks(风险) that could lead to intensified(增强) competition, or even conflict. The key to avoiding a hostile(敌对的) relationship is to get tangible(有形的) things done that benefit both of us. For all the potential flashpoints(闪点) between our countries, we share far more interests―spurring(骑马疾驰) global growth, combating(反对) climate change, maintaining(维护) peace and stability(稳定性). Yet this fact won't matter a whit(一点点) unless we are able to turn common concerns into complementary(补足的) policies and actions. We need to broaden(扩大) and deepen(加深) our economic ties, especially. And it is my hope that Dealing with China will shed(流出) some light on how to do just that.

One thing I will not do is to try to predict(预报) the future. I won't hesitate(踌躇), however, to make recommendations(推荐) about a range of topics including economic(经济的) reform(改革), financial(金融的) markets, urbanization(都市化), the environment, and ways to strengthen U.S.-China relations. Prescriptions(药方), after all, are easier to make than predictions(预报). My prescriptions are rooted in the personal experiences I share in these pages. I hope they will help those working with China, whether in business, government, or philanthropy(博爱), to get concrete(混凝土的) and productive(能生产的) results. That can't help but bring our two countries closer together.

We face daunting(使人畏缩的) challenges in today's increasingly complex(复杂的) and interconnected(连通的) world. Almost all of them, from cybersecurity to opening up big markets for American exports(出口商品), will be easier to meet if the United States and China can work together or in complementary(补足的) ways. Our task will be much more difficult, if not impossible, to solve if the world's two most important economic powers work against each other.


PART ONE

Banking on Reform

CHAPTER ONE

At the Purple Light Pavilion

The streets were quiet, the concrete(混凝土的) vastness(巨大) of Tiananmen Square mostly empty, as our car sped through central Beijing toward Zhongnanhai, the secluded(隐蔽的) compound(化合物) of the Chinese leadership(领导能力). It was the 25th of February 1997, a crisp(脆的), late winter day, near dusk. The globes of the square's streetlamps(路灯) had just come on. In my frequent trips to China, I had become used to the din and press of great throngs(人群) everywhere, not least on the roads with their ever-increasing ranks of cars, trucks, and buses. But today's was an eerie(可怕的) quiet such as I had never encountered(遭遇) before. Deng Xiaoping, the paramount(最重要的) leader of China, had died the previous week, and the nation was in mourning. I was on my way, with colleagues from Goldman Sachs, to a private meeting with one of Deng's protégés.

Deng had been the chief architect(建筑师) of the extraordinary changes sweeping China. With savvy(悟性), willpower, and relentless(无情的) pragmatism(实用主义), he had shucked(剥去) ideological(思想的) chains to devise(设计) a unique(独特的) brand of “socialism with Chinese characteristics(特征),” introduced market principles(原理), and encouraged individual(个人的) enterprise throughout the economy(经济), starting with agriculture and extending(延伸) into industrial(工业的) and financial(金融的) areas. The results of his “Reform(改革) and Opening Up” initiatives(主动权), begun in 1978, had been nothing short of spectacular(壮观的). After the political and economic(经济的) chaos(混沌) of Mao's last years, China's gross(总共的) domestic(国内的) product had soared(高飞) by near double-digit(两位数的) average annual(年度的) increases for two decades(十年), lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty(贫困). Once scarce(缺乏的) food staples(主要产品) were plentiful(丰富的). Previously unavailable, or unaffordable(买不起的), consumer(消费者) goods could be bought at rapidly proliferating(增生的) retail(零售的) outlets(出口), and China was quickly becoming a global manufacturing and export(输出) powerhouse.

Deng's death, though, raised questions of how far, and how fast, the country would pursue(继续) his vision(视力). That morning Jiang Zemin, general secretary of the Communist Party and the nation's most senior leader, had sought(寻找) to reassure(安心) the country and the world that he would stay the course. In a teary(哭泣的) eulogy(悼词) delivered before 10,000 handpicked(偏心挑选的) Party and military(军事的) leaders in the Great Hall of the People―and an estimated(估计的) 400 million on live television(电视)―Jiang had condemned(已被定罪的) the “grave(重大的) mistake” of the Cultural Revolution and pledged(保证) to continue Deng's policies(政策) of economic reform and international engagement(婚约). But, as I knew, certain hard-liners in the Communist Party and in the apparatus(装置) of the state were pressing to slow down or even halt(停止) reform. They feared that China would abandon(遗弃) Marxism or that the disruptions(破坏) caused by the changes might destabilize(动摇) the nation.

It was an altogether crucial(重要的) juncture(接缝) for the country. In July, a little more than four months away, Hong Kong was to be returned to China after more than 150 years under British rule. From this distance in time, it can be easy, especially for Americans, to forget just how momentous(重要的)―and nerve-wracking(非常伤脑筋的)―an occasion(时机) this was for all sides. Deng had devised a formula(公式) of “one country, two systems” to guarantee(保证) that Hong Kong could continue its capitalist(资本主义的) ways, with some political autonomy(自治), for at least 50 years after its return to China. But many in Hong Kong remained skeptical(怀疑的): a good number had fled China after the Communists came to power, and painful memories had been reawakened(想起) by Beijing's harsh(严厉的) crackdown(镇压) on protesters(抗议), mostly students, in Tiananmen Square in June 1989, nearly eight years before. Some 700,000 Hong Kong citizens, more than one in ten, had obtained foreign passports as a precaution(预防), and a number of companies had changed their corporate(法人的) domiciles(住宅).

I had flown up from Hong Kong that morning, eager and a little on edge. I was scheduled(安排) to meet with Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, the country's economic czar(沙皇). I knew that any matters involving(包含) reform or Hong Kong held the highest of priorities(优先) for China's senior leaders and had to be dealt(处理) with just right. There was simply no margin(边缘) for error. At the time, I was president and chief operating officer of Goldman Sachs, the investment(投资) bank, and, as it happened, I would be discussing with Zhu a matter that touched closely on both issues―restructuring(调整) China's telecommunications(电讯) system through an offering of shares in a newly formed Hong KongClisted company. As part of its rapid modernization(现代化), China had been investing(投资) heavily in the area, keenly(敏锐地) aware(意识到的) of how crucial state-of-the-art(最先进的) telecommunications were to a modern economy.

Western bankers were Promethean figures in this process: we jetted in and competed to show the Chinese how to kindle(点燃) the fire of capital markets. Goldman had been discussing aspects(方面) of a listing for months with representatives(代表) of China International Capital Corporation (CICC), an investment bank that was a joint(共同的) venture(企业) between one of the country's four biggest commercial(商业的) banks and Morgan Stanley. It was one of the many oddities(奇异) of doing business in China that we found ourselves working closely with the most senior Chinese banker at the partner of our most intense(强烈的) U.S. rival(对手). It was even odder(奇数的) that Morgan Stanley did not know what we were doing―and we had no interest in letting them find out.

Our team that day included John Thornton, a superb(极好的) dealmaker(交易人) who had helped establish(建立) our investment banking presence(存在) in Europe and had just been named chairman of Asia; Mike Evans, the head of our equity(公平) capital markets, who had worked on transforming(改变) state-owned industries into private companies across Europe; Hsueh-ming Wang, a seasoned relationship banker from the Hong Kong office; and Cherry Li, a native Chinese, who was our first representative in Beijing, where we had opened an office in 1994. John and Hsueh-ming had been working assiduously(刻苦地) for months to cultivate(培养) the senior Chinese executives(经理) of CICC.

We drove in two cars past the Forbidden City, the immense(巨大的) former imperial(帝国的) palace, and then past the Xinhua Gate, the ornate(华丽的), imposing(壮观的) southern entrance to Zhongnanhai. We turned north onto Fuyou Street, which traced(追溯) the red walls, topped with traditional cylindrical(圆柱形的) tiling(铺以瓦), of the leadership compound, before being admitted through the northwest entrance. Guards had already been informed(通知) of the license plate numbers of our cars, and after a quick head count, they waved us into the grounds with smart salutes.

For the center of power in China, where members of the leadership have worked, and sometimes lived, since the revolution, the compound itself was unprepossessing(不吸引人的) and understated(低调的). It resembled(类似) nothing so much as the campus(校园) of a small college during winter break, with traditional Chinese structures(结构) scattered(分散的) among small-scale(小规模的) beige(米黄色) and gray buildings, perhaps three or four stories high, that were bland(乏味的) and uninspired(无灵感的) from the outside, what an architectural(建筑学的) historian(历史学家) might call Soviet-style. Originally an imperial park and garden, Zhongnanhai had housed several palaces alongside(在…旁边) its lakes. Following the fall of the Qing dynasty(王朝), it served as the headquarters(总部) for the government of the Republic of China until 1928, then became a public park until the Communists came to power in 1949.

Zhu Rongji had chosen to see us at the Purple Light Pavilion, set near the edge of a lake. It was a striking, pagodalike structure, with vermilion(朱砂) walls and green roof tiles; it dated to the Ming dynasty and had long been used by the leadership to meet foreign guests in a more private manner. Chinese aides(助手) informed us that Zhu Rongji had not yet arrived and we had a few minutes to wait, so we hopped(加过酒花的) out of the cars into the brisk(敏锐的) late afternoon air.

We strolled(散步) across a grass verge(边缘) dotted with sycamores(美国梧桐) and conifers(针叶树), mostly pines and cedars(雪松). I heard the rasp(用粗锉刀锉) of a magpie(鹊的) but saw nothing when I peered(凝视) into the branches of the trees. Across a small lake I could see the outlines(轮廓) of the palace tops behind the immense walls of the Forbidden City, ghostly(幽灵的) in the fading light. A military guard unit quickstepped past, their arms swinging in that stiff(呆板的), elbows-locked way favored by the People's Liberation Army.

I did a last-minute run-through in my mind of the points that I wanted to make. My approach(方法) by necessity(需要) would have to be a bit circuitous(迂曲的). I wanted to be careful not to presume(假定) that any specific(特殊的) deal might be done, or to drag Zhu Rongji too deeply into the details, or worse, to give the impression that I might somehow be asking him to make a decision in favor of us, right then and there. But I wanted to make it clear that we understood how important reforming the economy was to China's future and how crucial modernizing(现代化) and overhauling(分解检查) state-owned enterprises (SOEs)like China's telecom(电信) business were to that process. And I wanted to make clear that Goldman Sachs was the best bank in the world to get done all these things that we were not going to specifically(特别地) speak about.

I asked Mike Evans if I was forgetting anything.

“You're set,” he said. “Just remember how much reform(改革) matters to Zhu.”

I had met Zhu Rongji a few years before, when China was planning to raise money in the international bond(债券) markets and we had advised the country on how to work with the credit agencies(代理). He was a formidable(强大的) figure. Tall and erect(竖立), he had been plucked(摘) by Deng from his post as mayor(市长) of Shanghai and installed(安装) as vice(副的) premier(总理) in 1991. Though officially the country's economic(经济的) portfolio(公文包) fell under Premier Li Peng, Zhu ran the economy(经济) day to day and was expected to succeed Li when the new leaders of the government were selected over the coming year.

Zhu had done a first-rate job. When the economy overheated(过热) in 1993, he had taken direct charge of the central bank and put in place a series of tough austerity(紧缩) measures and smart administrative(管理的) fixes, battling inflation(膨胀), which would rise to more than 20 percent before he guided China to a soft landing. Privatization(私有化) efforts, which had begun in a modest way in 1992 and 1993, had been shelved(搁置) temporarily(临时地), but now as the economy recovered, these had come to the forefront(最前线) again in discussions with individual(个人的) ministries(部门) and the State Council, China's equivalent(等价的) of the U.S. Cabinet.

Selling shares in the telecommunications(通讯) system to the public was meant to be a showcase(陈列橱) and the cornerstone(基础) of the next ambitious(野心勃勃的) phase(相) of reform, the restructuring(调整) of the giant(巨大的) state-owned enterprises that dominated(控制) Chinese commercial(商业的) life. In anticipation(希望) of membership(资格) in the World Trade Organization, Zhu Rongji had in mind a thorough revamping(修补) that would modernize(现代化) these lumbering(伐木) money-losing behemoths(巨兽) and make Chinese businesses more efficient(有效率的) and more competitive(竞争的). He would accomplish(完成) this in part by bringing in foreign know-how(诀窍) and investors(投资者) that he believed would push for global standards of management, controls, operations, and governance(管理).

If Deng was the architect(建筑师) of reform, and Jiang Zemin the general contractor(承包人) carrying out his vision(视力), then, to borrow a term often used to describe me, Zhu Rongji was the hammer. He had no shortage(缺乏) of big ideas himself, but above all he got things done. He was frank, practical, and to the point. I never doubted for a second what he wanted, nor did his subordinates(下属). Known as the Boss, he was tough, demanding, fond of imposing(利用) unrealistically(不切实际地) tight deadlines: in short, a man after my own heart.

To get a meeting in China with an important government figure requires a sponsor(赞助者). Our meeting with Zhu had been suggested and arranged by Wang Qishan, the head of China Construction Bank (CCB), the bank partnering with Morgan Stanley in CICC. Wang was a warm, dynamic(动态的) leader who exuded(散发) charisma(魅力) and intellectual(智力的) curiosity(好奇) and had an uncanny(神秘的) ability to connect with people, Chinese or Western. I could see he was gifted and going places. Today, after several years as a vice premier overseeing finance and trade, Wang Qishan serves on the Party's seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, China's most powerful body, and heads its Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, tasked with rooting out corruption(贪污).

The previous summer Wang Qishan had stopped by my office at Goldman Sachs in New York to gauge(测量) our interest in helping to take China Telecom(电信) public. China Construction Bank was unhappy with Morgan Stanley and looking for an alternative(二中择一). My colleagues and I were eager to work on a groundbreaking(动工) transaction(交易) of such importance to the future of China, but we were also wary(谨慎的). Taking China Telecom public would involve(包含) an immense(巨大的) amount(数量) of work, because, to begin with, there was no such thing as a company as we understood it in conventional(符合习俗的) terms. There were customers, there were phones, there were exchanges, there was a small but rapidly growing mobile telephony(电话) business, but it was all scattered(分散的) throughout the country in the village, township(镇区), city, county(郡), and provincial(省的) outposts(前哨) and headquarters(总部) of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications.

The MPT was a creaky(发辗的) bureaucratic(官僚的) holdover(延期) of the Maoist era that had under its purview(范围) more than a million employees(雇员) and thousands of local bureaus(局). It had little in the way of modern management systems or controls, much less a sound capital structure(结构). Building and upgrading the communications infrastructure(基础设施) had been a focal(焦点的) point of one national five-year plan after another. China had spent $35 billion since 1992 and was adding more than 16 million lines a year. But phone access was still minimal(最低的), and coverage(覆盖) was spotty(发疹的). In a country of 1.2 billion, there were just 55 million landline subscribers(订阅), concentrated(集中) in coastal(沿海的) cities and special economic zones.

Several Chinese aides(助手) escorted(护送) us inside the pavilion(阁), up a set of steps flanked(守侧面) by traditional stone lions, and around an imposing, intricately(杂乱地) carved wooden door screen. We entered a bright, airy(空气的) wood-framed room that soared(高飞) to coffered(把…放进箱柜) ceilings perhaps 20 feet high; these were painted in pastels(粉蜡笔)―salmon(浅澄色的) pink, green, and blue―and trimmed(平衡的) in gold. Zhu Rongji greeted us warmly, shaking our hands and inviting us to take our seats.

I sat to Zhu's right. Cherry(樱桃) Li, acting as my interpreter(解释者), was behind me and to my side, while Zhu's interpreter was behind him. Wang Qishan sat to Zhu's left, flanked by additional(附加的) executives(经理) from China Construction Bank. Chinese meetings have a definite(一定的) choreography(编舞) and ceremony(典礼) to them, and it is within this context(环境) that you look for the signals being sent and the messages being given. In general, everyone sits in chairs set out in a horseshoe(装蹄铁于) or U-shaped arrangement, with the most senior Chinese official at the closed end of the U and the most important visitor to his right; other Chinese officials and members of the visiting delegation(代表团) are arrayed(排列的) in descending(下降的) rank on the flanks of the horseshoe, facing one another. In the old days the chair backs were quaintly(古雅的) covered with antimacassars(椅子罩子); you see fewer of these Victorian artifacts(史前古器物) today.

Meetings are anything but free-form. The host and his guest take turns speaking, followed by their interpreters, who usually sit behind the leaders. The rest of the attendees(出席者) do not speak unless spoken to―which often means not at all. There is no interchange(互换) or dialogue in the conventional sense. There can be a stilted(不自然的), scripted feel to the proceedings(开始). On the Chinese side, a bevy(一群) of officials and aides, young and old, junior and senior in rank, assiduously(刻苦地) take notes. Note taking is de rigueur, a ubiquitous(普遍存在的) element(元素) of Chinese official life―even today when so many more sophisticated(复杂的) recording methods are available. Indeed, when I met with the now-disgraced Chongqing Party secretary Bo Xilai in Chongqing in December 2011, I was amused to see a handful of note takers diligently(勤奋地) copying down everything we said, even though I had noticed the lights of recording devices(装置) blinking(眨眼) away under our tented name cards on the broad conference table.

Note taking allows Party and government officials to get quick reads on what went on at meetings they didn't attend. Senior officials can disseminate(宣传) information internally(内部地) as well as keep a close eye on what's being said by others in the hierarchy(层级) so that messages don't deviate(脱离) from expectations. I can recall(召回) only a few times I went to a meeting in China where I was not reminded, one way or another, by a senior official of something that had come up in an earlier meeting with one of his colleagues. It does tend(照料) to keep you on your toes. Private meetings with senior government officials without recording devices or note takers are rare and highly sought(寻找) after.

Zhu apologized for his tardiness(缓慢); he had just come from another meeting. Then he invited me to speak first, and I began by expressing my condolences(哀悼) and those of my colleagues at Goldman on the passing of Deng Xiaoping. And while commending(推荐) Zhu's success in reducing inflation and guiding the economy to a soft landing, I expressed confidence that under his leadership(领导能力), “the pace of reform [would] speed up a notch(刻痕).”

The competition to work with the government would be intense(强烈的), so I reviewed Goldman's extensive(广泛的) experience in advising governments. And I reminded Zhu of our senior executives whom he knew personally―men like Brian Griffiths, Baron Griffiths of Fforestfach, who had run the Thatcher government's privatization efforts, and Peter Sutherland, the former head of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and subsequently(随后) the first director-general(总干事) of the World Trade Organization. Zhu was spearheading(带头) China's effort to join the WTO, which would not only bring economic benefits(利益) but serve as a welcome outside source of pressure to promote(促进) his program of domestic(国内的) reform.

I spoke for several minutes, stopping after every couple of sentences for Zhu's translator to pick up the thread and repeat it in Chinese. I watched as Zhu nodded both at my words as I said them and at the translation. He spoke English fairly well and understood it even better, and later, as I got to know him, he would frequently slip in a sentence or two of English.

Following a suggestion from Wang Qishan, I focused on our work with Deutsche Telekom. I explained how Goldman had led the German company to its successful IPO the previous November. That had come after nearly eight years of our advising the Germans on how to revamp a bloated(发胀的) government department, akin(类似的) to China's Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications, with posts and telecom business mixed together, which was plagued(折磨) by low-quality service, low work efficiency(效率), and weak finances. The IPO had raised $13 billion, financing the development of telecom industry infrastructure, particularly in the former East Germany, the once Communist state. The deal had strengthened Deutsche Telekom domestically(国内地), made it competitive in the vast international market, and allowed it to take care of pension and medical insurance costs for retired and redundant(多余的) workers.

The last point was a big concern(关系) for Zhu Rongji: reforming China's state-owned enterprises would mean breaking the so-called iron rice bowl, the cradle-to-grave(一辈子的) care and support guaranteed(保证) by the government through the big companies people worked for. The risk(风险) was that these changes would result in soaring unemployment that might lead to social unrest, and Chinese leaders feared instability(不稳定) more than anything. The Party had made a simple bargain with the people: economic growth in return for political stability(稳定性). That in turn meant Party control. Prosperity(繁荣) was the source of Party legitimacy(合法).

National pride was also at stake(桩). “It was not just Deutsche Telekom listing, but also Germany itself listing on the market, and the image of Germany improved as well,” I said. “Nineteen ninety-seven is a crucial(重要的) year, and in keeping with the Handover, telecom reform should start in Hong Kong and become a catalyst(催化剂) for pushing the development of the entire Chinese telecom industry.”

I am sure that little I said came as a surprise to Zhu Rongji. He would have been well briefed by Wang Qishan, with whom I had been discussing these issues at length, and I stuck largely to the points Wang Qishan had advised me to make. But it was important that I make a strong case directly to Zhu Rongji to demonstrate(证明) Goldman's bona(好的) fides and my personal commitment(承诺) to the success of China's efforts. Moreover, Wang Qishan wanted to work with Goldman, and I had to deliver for him, as well as for Goldman.

When I was done, Zhu nodded and began to speak, addressing two key points on the collective(集体的) leadership's mind: the importance of reform(改革) and Hong Kong. But first, he spoke with some feeling about the passing of his mentor(指导者), declaring that “the Chinese people… will unswervingly(坚定不移地) carry out Reform and Opening Up. They will turn grief(悲痛) into strength and achieve Comrade Deng Xiaoping's wishes.”

I was glad he addressed the subject of Deng, because I had gone against my advisers' counsel(法律顾问) in mentioning him (they had believed it would be inappropriate(不适当的) for a foreigner to speak of the passing of the paramount(最重要的) leader). But I simply couldn't imagine meeting Zhu and not expressing my condolences(哀悼) under the circumstances(环境). While I always listened carefully to my China team, and usually took their advice, there were times, like this, when I went with my gut instinct(本能). I had learned that the Chinese valued authenticity(真实性) and had come to expect me to speak my mind.

“China's favorable(有利的) economic(经济的) situation,” Zhu said, assured(保证) that “there will not be any problems with the return of Hong Kong. I think the majority of people have confidence in the continued prosperity(繁荣) of Hong Kong.” He reiterated(重申) that after the Handover, Hong Kong would be administered(管理) under the “one country, two systems” model and that the “Chinese central government will not interfere(干涉) with Hong Kong Special Administrative Region political or economic issues.” China's leaders took every opportunity(时机) they got to make this point. They wanted to reassure(安心) the residents(居民) of Hong Kong, Macau, and just as important, Taiwan, for which this model was also intended.

As Zhu spoke in Chinese, he mostly engaged(吸引) me directly, once in a while looking off to where my colleagues sat. No one else from the Chinese side spoke. I happened to look down to where Zhu rested his black shoes in the thick rug, and I noticed the edge of his long johns peeking(窥视) out under his trouser cuff(袖口). He was, as I've said, a very practical man, and the old offices in Beijing in those days could get awfully(可怕地) cold and drafty(通风良好的).

Then he spoke the first of the words we wanted to hear: “Of course, we will consider your opinions, and we hope to cooperate(合作) with you. If you are interested in cooperating with the Chinese government in the area of telecommunications(通讯), I think you can communicate further with the Ministry(部门) of Posts and Telecommunications.”

That was it, but it was everything. The meeting had been set up without any representatives(代表) from the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications present. We were scheduled(安排) the next day to see Minister Wu Jichuan, a powerful longtime telecommunications official. We had been working for some time with representatives of CICC, the investment(投资) bank, and the ministry, but we were concerned(涉及) (and I think CICC was, too) that MPT might have other ideas about whom to use in the transaction(交易). Zhu's words, of course, would get back to MPT and Minister Wu posthaste(特快的).

When Zhu had finished, I jumped in. Keenly(敏锐的) aware(意识到的) that the competition for the deal would be intense(强烈的), I cited(引用) Goldman's prowess(英勇) in doing deals of this sort around the world and noted that we had done more privatizations(私有化) of state-owned enterprises than the next three investment banks combined. “This will be a complicated(难懂的) program,” I said. “But we will spare no effort to provide our skills and specialized(专业的) knowledge.”

Zhu nodded and wrapped(包) up our meeting, saying: “I welcome you to further cooperate with China Construction Bank. By cooperating with your company, CCB will benefit(利益) in its commercialization(商品化) process and speed up its modernization(现代化) process.”

With that he thanked us, and except for some parting pleasantries(幽默), the meeting was over.

The Chinese leaders are charming(迷人的) hosts and interlocutors(对话者), skilled at making you feel good, leading you to think you've heard what you wanted to hear. It's easy to become giddy(头晕的) and overly optimistic(乐观的). I had listened very carefully to Zhu Rongji and felt great about the meeting. But once we were outside, I turned to my colleagues for a quick reality check.

“How did we do?” I asked my team.

“I can't imagine that could have gone any better,” John replied. Mike(扩音器) and Hsueh-ming agreed.

So, in short, we had just concluded a meeting about doing an initial public offering in which we hadn't said a word about a specific(特殊的) deal, much less its timing, size, or pricing; the powerful senior minister of the business we would work with had not been present; and the company itself did not exist in any real sense: we would have to create it. It was not the kind of deal we could have done, or would have thought about doing, almost anywhere else in the world.

But this was China in 1997, and we felt pretty good about where we stood.

Messages in China are sent in ways that aren't always direct; you have to read the signs. Perhaps the most important aspect(方面) of the meeting was not so much what Zhu Rongji had said. It was that we had had the meeting at all. There were plenty of other ways he might have communicated with us. On a day when much of the government's business had been shut down, he made a point of seeing us―about a controversial(有争议的) deal that would be the linchpin(关键) and showpiece(展出品) of his future reform program. The man running China's economy(经济), who would be crucial(重要的) in all future decisions, had appraised(评价) us in person, and we appeared to have passed muster(集合).

He had encouraged us to work with China Construction Bank and the ministry that oversaw(看管) telecommunications, and he had lent to us, publicly, his weight and prestige(威望). This was a powerful signal to give to us and to send out to the Chinese state and Party bureaucracies(官僚主义). The meeting would not seal the deal for us. I knew that. Zhu's blessing was a comfort but no guarantee(保证). We would still have to continue to compete, to go through the formalities(礼节) and navigate(驾驶) layers of decision making below Zhu. We had a leg up, but we could easily lose our advantage if we weren't relentless(无情的). I'd been down that road many times. It was the nature of dealing with China: nothing was done until it was done. We'd seen any number of seemingly surefire(一定成功的) business opportunities simply fail to materialize(具体化). But this deal seemed certain to get done, and every bank would be fighting for it, pulling strings, working the system. Months of hard work and careful maneuvering(机动) lay ahead before we could be given the formal(正式的) mandate(授权) for what seemed sure to be the biggest IPO by far of any Chinese state-owned enterprise.

We drove past Tiananmen Square on the way back to my hotel. I caught a glimpse(一瞥) of the giant(巨人) two-story portrait(肖像) of Mao on the wall of the Forbidden City and wondered, for a moment, what he would have thought of capitalist(资本主义的) bankers selling shares in one of his country's state-owned companies to foreigners. In front of the National Museum of China, which faced the Great Hall of the People across Tiananmen Square, I could see the huge digital clock counting down the number of days until Hong Kong was returned to China: 124.

The sight gave me a start. We weren't on the same timetable as the Handover, but I couldn't help thinking: we had just a few months to complete a deal that in a well-oiled(谄媚的) Western economy would take at least a year.

I turned to Mike Evans beside me in the back seat of the car: “How exactly are we going to get this done?”


CHAPTER TWO

Chinese Bodies, Foreign Technology

The key to breaking into new markets is to brand yourself by building strong relationships with the most important clients. Goldman Sachs' initial route(路线) into China went through Hong Kong, and one of the most important businessmen I met early on was C. H. Tung, who would eventually(最后) become the first chief executive(经理) of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, the successor(继承者) to the British colonial(殖民地的) administration(管理). He would serve from the Handover in 1997 until 2005.

C.H. ran Orient Overseas(在海外) Container Line, founded by his father, C. Y. Tung, a visionary(梦想的) shipping magnate(巨头) who built one of the world's biggest fleets(舰队) and famously bought the ocean liner RMS Queen Elizabeth to convert(转变) into a floating university (it caught fire during refurbishing(刷新) and capsized(翻覆的) in Hong Kong Harbor). Orient Overseas had run into trouble in the mid-1980s during a global shipping slump(衰退), and had been helped in part by mainland Chinese sources.

Orient(适应) Overseas did not have much business for us, but C.H. was a font of wisdom, an astute(机敏的) observer of China, and a big fan of America. C.H.'s closeness(亲密) to China's leaders had convinced(说服) him not only of the seriousness(严重性) of their long-term vision(视力) but also of the nation's likely success. He was a strong supporter of Deng Xiaoping's economic(经济的) policies(政策) and advised me that Goldman Sachs should focus on China if we truly intended to be a force in the region.

On one of my early trips to Hong Kong, Henry Cornell, a young real estate(房地产) banker who would eventually run our private equity(公平) business in the region, described a prime(主要的) piece of real estate that C.H. was looking to develop in Beijing. Plans for Oriental Plaza called for an enormous(庞大的) multipurpose development, the largest in Asia, with offices, residences(住宅), shopping venues(审判地), hotels, and restaurants. It couldn't have been better located(处于): the corner of Chang'an Avenue and Wangfujing Street, a stone's throw from Tiananmen Square, and arguably(可论证地) the best real estate in China. As a way to get to know the market, I asked C.H. if Goldman could invest(投资) alongside(在…旁边) him, and he agreed.

In 1992 I joined C.H. and some other investors(投资者) when they flew up to see Chinese leader Jiang Zemin about the project. I had worked in the White House in my twenties and had met with President Nixon on numerous(许多的) occasions(时机), but I still found myself awed(充满敬畏的) to be meeting with the general secretary of China's Communist Party. Jiang Zemin was a force of nature, with a big, outgoing(外出的) personality(个性). He had been picked by Deng to run the country in 1989 after the Tiananmen crackdown(镇压) because of his adroit(敏捷的) handling of student protests(抗议) in Shanghai, where he had been Party secretary. Jiang could be easy for foreigners to underestimate(低估) because he had a disarming(使人消气的) manner, with his thick black-rimmed glasses and unimposing(不庄严的) appearance.

We met with Jiang at the Great Hall of the People, the cavernous(似巨穴的) Soviet-style building that stretches(伸展) a fifth of a mile along the western edge of Tiananmen Square in the heart of Beijing. Perhaps because I was the only Westerner among the group of eight or ten, I played an outsize(特大的) role in the discussion. Jiang began speaking in English to me, rattling(很好的) off the names of U.S. companies like General Electric, Boeing, and IBM, and stressing(强调) how important it was that China adopt(采取) U.S. accounting methods. He was right, of course: Chinese companies' books were generally a mess, and until the country embraced(拥抱) transparency(透明) and adopted stricter accounting standards, it would be impossible to sell the shares of its big companies overseas. He looked me right in the eye and said, “Assets equal liabilities(责任) plus equity,” and I almost burst out laughing. As I have said since, I'm not sure that our country's leaders could have summed up a balance sheet as succinctly(简洁地) as this born-and-bred Communist.

The trip took place right after the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, where Michael Jordan and the U.S. men's basketball “Dream Team” had put on such a show. The world had also been treated to the spectacle(景象) of the Chinese women swimmers unexpectedly(出乎意料地) winning four gold medals. Jiang asked me if I had been following the Olympics.

“Yes, of course,” I said.

“What did you think of our swimmers?” he asked. He watched me closely. The Chinese team had come from nowhere to win at record-setting paces, and there were widespread rumors(谣言) of illegal(非法的) doping(掺杂质).

“Very interesting,” I said, searching for a neutral(中立的) tone(语气). Jiang nodded, then said with a smile, “Chinese bodies, foreign technology.”

I've often thought since of that phrase: Chinese bodies, foreign technology. I learned later that it echoed(反射) the words of Zhang Zhidong, a 19th-century Qing Dynasty official who championed opening his country to the outside world, advocating(提倡), “Chinese learning as a base, Western learning for practical applications.” This approach(方法) explained much about China's rise over the past few decades(十年): it is the essence(本质) of Reform and Opening Up. The Chinese took their enormous store of human power, their brawn(发达的肌肉) and their brains, and coupled it with knowledge and innovation(创新) and best practices that they've begged, borrowed, bought, and, frankly(真诚地), stolen from the West. The combination(结合) has allowed the Chinese to turn themselves into an extraordinary colossus(巨像) that boasts(自夸) the fastest-growing military(军队) among major powers and a rapidly expanding(扩张) GDP that is expected to pass that of the U.S. in the not-too-distant future.

The idea of China challenging the U.S. for economic superiority(优越) any time soon would have been unimaginable(不可思议的) back when I met Jiang. China was only just waking up from the political and economic nightmares(恶梦) of its recent past.

When Mao Zedong proclaimed(宣告) the founding of the People's Republic of China in Tiananmen Square in October 1949, he was charting a new course for a country hobbled(蹒跚) by more than a century of colonial oppression(压抑) and internal(内部的) rebellion(叛乱) that had culminated(到绝顶) in two decades of widespread, constant conflict(冲突)―against warlords(军阀) and the Japanese and between the Communists and the Nationalist armies of Chiang Kai-shek in a long-running civil war. In short order, Mao imposed(利用) Soviet-style command and control economic planning on the country, collectivizing(集团化) agriculture and shifting(移动) resources to a massive(大量的) industrialization(工业化) program that focused on heavy machinery(机械) manufacturing, with scant(不足的) attention to consumer(消费者) goods and services. The economy(经济) grew as it recovered from wartime(战时) disruptions(破坏), and China made strides(大步) in meeting the basic needs of its people. But the imposition(征收) of misguided policies and disastrous(灾难性的) planning in the midst(当中) of a political reign(统治) of terror(恐怖) wreaked(发泄) havoc(大破坏). Mao's attempt to accelerate(加快) industrialization by mobilizing(动员) ordinary citizens in the Great Leap Forward (1958C1961) led to widespread famine(饥荒) thought to have killed 30 million or more.

Maneuvering(机动) to hold on to power, Mao subsequently(随后) initiated(开始) the Cultural Revolution, purging(清除) the senior ranks of the Communist Party and unleashing(发动) the Red Guards to persecute(迫害) millions throughout the country in the name of class struggle. Universities were shut and educated youth sent to the countryside to do manual(手工的) labor. Many of today's rising generation of leaders lost years toiling(辛苦工作) in rural(农村的) areas before the country's nightmare ended with Mao's death in 1976.

By then the country was in shambles(蹒跚), isolated(隔离) internationally and adrift(随波逐流地) economically(经济地). Mao's radical(激进的) egalitarianism(平等主义) had triumphed(获得胜利) in a perversely(堕落的) dystopian(反面假想国的) way: the masses―farmers or factory workers―were all more or less poor. More than half of China's nearly 1 billion people lived in dire(可怕的) poverty(贫困), on less than $1 per day, and the country suffered from chronic(慢性的) shortages(缺乏). Staples(主要产品) like grain and cloth were still rationed(配给) into the 1980s and beyond. By contrast(对比), during the years of Mao's reign(统治), the U.S. enjoyed a postwar(战后的) surge(大浪) in prosperity(繁荣): from 1949 to 1976, GDP grew almost sevenfold(七倍的), to $1.8 trillion(万亿), while per capita(头数) income nearly quintupled(使成五倍).

In 1978 Deng Xiaoping, who had survived(幸存) repeated political banishment(流放) to emerge(浮现) as the paramount(最重要的) leader, set the country on a course of profound(深厚的) change. He began by rejecting Mao's corrosive(腐蚀的) politics and focusing the Party on economic(经济的) development, encouraging the adoption(采用) of market principles(原理) to shape “socialism with Chinese characteristics(特征).” A pragmatist(实用主义者) at heart, he famously said, “It doesn't matter whether a cat is black or white, as long as it catches mice.”

The first significant(重大的) reforms(改革) occurred in agriculture. Farmers, forced into collectives(集团), had been required to concentrate(集中) on growing grains to meet constantly raised targets and to sell their produce for low prices, effectively(有效地) subsidizing(资助) urban(城市的) industry. Productivity(生产力) stagnated(停滞) and China routinely(例行公事地) had to import food. Spurred(骑马疾驰) by Deng, the leadership(领导能力) decided to give the collectives more leeway(余地). Many imitated(模仿的) experiments under way in places like Anhui and Sichuan Provinces that allowed farmers to cultivate(培养) small, private plots(情节). Before long, collectives across the country had adopted(采取) the so-called household(家庭的) responsibility(责任) system in which farms were divided into smaller family-run plots. The households contracted(收缩) to meet certain quotas(配额) and were free to sell any surplus(剩余) on the open market. With these new incentives(动机), productivity soared(高飞). The grain yield(产量) rose by 34 percent between 1978 and 1984. By then collectives had all but disappeared. Farmers had expanded(扩充的) into more lucrative(有利可图的) cash crops and livestock(牲畜), giving the Chinese people richer and more varied(多变的) diets and putting money in the farmers' pockets to spend.

The increased productivity meant fewer workers were needed in the countryside. Many of the excess(超过) laborers were absorbed(吸收) by newly created or energized(激励的) rural(农村的) factories; these township(镇区) and village enterprises were frequently owned by local governments but were not included in the overall national economic plan. They were free to act more like private sector(部门) companies, churning(搅拌) out goods in high demand in the market or competing with big centrally controlled state-owned monoliths(整块石料). Rural Chinese began to look farther afield(在战场上) for work. Millions headed for the coastal(沿海的) cities, drawn to the factories mushrooming there, beginning a wave of urbanization(都市化) unprecedented(空前的) in human history: over the next three decades(十年) some 300 million people would move from farms to urban areas, massively(大量地) boosting(促进) the nation's productivity but contributing(贡献) to bouts(回合) of unrest and ever-worsening environmental(环境的) degradation(退化).

Reform came to the urban industrial(工业的) sector as well. Beijing undertook(承担) industry-wide restructuring(调整) efforts, hiving off new companies from enormous(庞大的) government ministries(部门). It began to shift(移动) its emphasis(重点) from heavy industry to consumer(消费者) goods and took steps to give state-owned enterprises greater autonomy(自治), decentralizing(分散) decision making and introducing a dual-track pricing system. Managers were required to meet modified(改进的) plan quotas but were permitted, beyond that, to produce and sell goods on the open market at flexible(灵活的) prices. This lucrative gray market was meant to help push state-owned enterprises to focus more on profit(利润) than on fulfilling(令人满意的) plan quotas, and executives(经理) were given more latitude(纬度) to operate and to experiment with incentives.

Keeping his pledge(保证) to rejoin(再加入) the international economy(经济), Deng gave the go-ahead to politicians in Fujian and Guangdong, in southeastern(东南方的) China, to create special economic zones, or SEZs, to take advantage of links with overseas(海外的) Chinese communities. Shenzhen was next to Hong Kong, Zhuhai bordered the then-Portuguese colony(殖民地) of Macau, and Xiamen and Shantou lay across the strait from Taiwan. Chinese and foreign companies operating in the special economic zones enjoyed lower tax rates, did not have to pay import duties on components(成分) and supplies for processing, faced fewer import and export(输出) restrictions(限制), and had easier access to investment(投资) from foreign sources. Powerful symbols(象征) of China's commitment(承诺) to Reform and Opening Up, the SEZs served as laboratories that, among other things, embraced(拥抱) incentive pay for workers and competitive(竞争的) bidding for construction contracts. In 1984 Deng Xiaoping visited Shenzhen to mark a new round of reforms that accepted the inevitability(必然性) that some individuals(个人) would become wealthier than others. “To get rich is no sin,” Deng explained to Mike Wallace of the TV show 60 Minutes in 1986. “We permit some people and some regions to become prosperous(繁荣的) first, for the purpose of achieving common prosperity faster.”

That message went out to all, unleashing(发动) the pent-up(被压抑的) energy and ingenuity(心灵手巧) of the Chinese people, who were eager to improve their lot after years of privation(贫困). The economy boomed(兴旺). GDP jumped by an average of 10 percent annually(每年) in the early 1980s, and incomes soared in urban (up 60 percent) and rural (up 150 percent) areas. Washing machines, color TVs, and motorcycles replaced the bicycles, wristwatches(手表), and sewing machines that had been status symbols under Mao. Millions upon of millions of these must-have items were bought.

Entrepreneurs(企业家) began to make their presence(存在) felt. Eager to use their long-suppressed talents(才能), some jumped from stable(稳定的) jobs in government, state companies, or academia(学术界) to xia hai, or plunge(投入) into the sea of business, as a popular phrase from that era put it. Other intrepid(无畏的) souls came from farms to try working for themselves―as street vendors(卖主), food stall(货摊) operators, bicycle repairmen, small-scale(小规模的) manufacturers, insurance salesmen. In the process, they authored improbable(不大可能的) success stories to rival(与…竞争) any from America's fabled(编寓言) Gilded Age. Though state-owned companies continued to enjoy enormous government-sanctioned advantages, these pioneers would become the engines of China's job creation(创造) and innovation(创新) and the foundation(基础) of many of the country's biggest companies and greatest fortunes.

“People in the U.S. have no way of understanding that before Reform and Opening Up, even if you had the ability, you couldn't do anything with it,” my friend computing pioneer Liu Chuanzhi once told me. “But reform gave people a choice.”

Liu certainly made the most of his choices. In 1984, at age 40, he and several colleagues decided to leave a computer research institute at the prestigious(有名望的) Chinese Academy of Sciences with the equivalent(等价物) of a little less than $80,000 in backing from the institute and the use of a former bicycle shed(流出) on its grounds. The fledgling(无经验的人) entrepreneurs tried selling TVs and digital watches before hitting it big with a circuit(电路) card that enabled personal computers to process Chinese characters. Before long, the company was making and selling its own PCs, in addition to distributing(分配) those of foreign manufacturers. It soon dominated(控制) the country's computer market, on its way to becoming today's mammoth(长毛象) Lenovo, and turned chairman Liu into a national icon.

There were many stories like Liu's in the 1980s. Cao Dewang was born in 1946 in Fujian, the province just north of Guangdong on China's southeastern coast, across from Taiwan. Cao peddled(叫卖) cut tobacco and became a fruit seller and chef(厨师) after a stint(节约) in the countryside during the Cultural Revolution. By 1983 he was running a municipal(市政的) glass factory. Four years later he set off on his own, launching(发射) Fuyao Glass Corporation. He first made panels(仪表板) for water meters, then, specializing(专攻) in safety glass, he built a global company that is the second-largest, and most profitable(有利可图的), supplier of windows for auto companies like General Motors, Volkswagen, and Toyota Motor Corporation.

Or consider Zong Qinghou: after a decade on a communal(公共的) farm during the Cultural Revolution, he was peddling popsicles, soda(苏打), and notebooks by tricycle(三轮车) in his native Hangzhou. In 1987, along with two retired teachers, Zong, who didn't go to high school, secured(保护) a $22,000 loan(贷款) and began selling tonics(补药) for children and later adults. The drinks caught on and turned his company, Hangzhou Wahaha Group (wahaha is Mandarin for “laughing children”), into China's dominant(显性的) beverage(饮料) company and Zong into the richest person in the country in 2013.

Still, the path of reform was uneven: these early forays(突袭) into capitalism(资本主义) did not come smoothly or without cost. Political changes lagged(落后于) economic ones, resources were wasted, pollution worsened(恶化), and the unequal distribution(分布) of new wealth gave rise to widespread complaints(抱怨) about nepotism(裙带关系) and corruption(贪污). Reformers had to contend(竞争) with more conservative elements(基础) in the Party that wanted to slow or halt(停止) the pace and extent(程度) of change. Unintended consequences(结果) abounded(富于). The country's leadership had wanted to prohibit(阻止) a return to family farming even as it loosened(放松) the reins(缰绳) on the collectives, but once unleashed there was no holding back the farmers. Six years later collectives were gone and family farms predominated(支配).

Deng understood that change would be unpredictable(不可预知的) and fraught(担心的) with danger. The country, he said, would have to approach(接近) reform like crossing a stream by feeling for stones, one at a time. For much of the 1980s, it was two stones forward, one stone back.

Growth accelerated(加速) and stalled in abrupt(生硬的) turns as Deng and fellow Party elders like Chen Yun, who had sponsored(赞助) Deng's rehabilitation(复原) in the 1970s, wrestled(摔跤) with how much and how quickly to proceed(开始). Early initiatives(主动权) led to spurts(冲刺) of overheating(过热) that were reined in by Chen, a conservative who advocated(提倡) careful economic planning and slower growth. A member of the all-powerful(全能的) Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, Chen was known for his “birdcage” theory, which proposed(建议) that the free market in China should have just enough freedom to fly like a bird inside the bars of a planned economy.

A particularly difficult time came in 1988, when the economy turned down after a botched(糟蹋) effort to lift price controls. Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang, a committed(坚定的) reformer, had pressed leaders to adopt market pricing for all but a few staple items to avoid the messiness(乱糟糟) and potential(潜在的) corruption inherent(内在的) in the two-track system, where goods could be bought by state entities(实体) through official channels and sold for more on the open market. Deng allowed controls to be removed on an increasing number of goods, and prices started rising. Rapid credit expansion(膨胀) sparked(发动) economic growth, but inflation(膨胀) soared, spooking(惊吓) a public used to the fixed prices and chronic shortages of consumer goods of the central planning era. When Zhao let it be known that the government had decided to completely liberalize(自由化) prices, people panicked(恐慌). They hoarded(积聚钱财) food, yanked deposits(存款) from banks, and took to the streets in protest(表示抗议的), causing the State Council to reverse(颠倒) course and reinstitute(重新建立) some price controls.

Conservatives wrested(用力拧) control of economic policy(政策) from Zhao, and China headed toward a hard landing. Investment dropped, wage increases stopped, bank lending was curtailed(简略), construction projects were canceled. Growth plunged in 1989, even as inflation remained very high. This tailspin(混乱), coupled with continued anger over corruption, formed the backdrop(背景) to the 1989 student protests that were sparked by the April death of Hu Yaobang, the reformist(改良主义的) general secretary who had been ousted(驱逐) in 1987. The military(军事的) crackdown(镇压) in Tiananmen Square put further market reform and price liberalization(自由化) on hold. Foreign governments and corporations cut back on trade and curtailed investment to object to the violent suppression(抑制) of the protests.

By 1991, when I made my first trip to China, the mighty(有力的) engine of the Chinese people was about to be jump-started again. In January 1992 Deng Xiaoping, though technically in retirement(退休), traveled through the south calling for the pace of reform to be sped up. In Shenzhen, he said the SEZ experiment had exceeded(超过) his expectations, and he proclaimed(宣告) himself reassured(安心). He rebuked(指责) hard-liners who feared these changes would lead to capitalism and said the Party had more to fear from ideologues(思想家) of the ultra-left than liberalizers on the right. Such was the nature of the politics of the day that it took weeks before Deng's Southern Tour, reported by newspapers in Hong Kong and Guangdong, made national news. By then Deng had outmaneuvered(以计谋胜过) the hard-liners, and Party General Secretary Jiang Zemin, who had been contending with conservatives in Beijing, grasped(抓住) Deng's banner firmly. That fall reformers Zhu Rongji, a vice(副的) premier(总理), and Hu Jintao, Party secretary of the Tibet Autonomous Region, joined the Standing Committee. GDP shot ahead by more than 14 percent as credit spigots(龙头) opened and provinces tried to outdo(超过) one another in promoting(促进) pell-mell(混乱) growth. In 1993 the Politburo endorsed(背书) the “socialist market economy.”

For the first two-thirds(三分之二) of my life, China was as far from my mind as it was from my hometown of Barrington, Illinois (population 5,012). My grasp of the country was shallow and ill informed(通知). I'd grown up like most Americans of my generation in the shadow of the Cold War, ducking under my desk with my classmates in preparation for a nuclear first strike. My father even built a concrete-lined(以混凝土衬砌的) bomb shelter in the basement and stocked it with canned goods. (My mother still uses it to store Christmas decorations and other odds(几率) and ends.) We worried that the Russians would bomb us, and, if they didn't, that the Chinese would develop the ability to do so. And unlike our experience with the Russians, we'd actually fought the Chinese. Stories of the Chinese pouring across the Yalu River or brainwashing(洗脑) captured(俘获) GIs were riveting(铆接) and deeply disturbing to me as a boy. Similar impressions stayed with many.

I was as astonished as anyone when President Nixon landed in China in February 1972. I was working in the Pentagon then and moved to the White House domestic(国内的) policy staff(职员) two months later, just before Nixon's trip to Moscow kicked off détente. I grasped the brilliance(光辉) of his moves, triangulating(成三角形) our strategic(战略上的) interests to throw the Soviet Union off balance even as we prepared for the Vietnam(越南) War to end. But I was narrowly focused on my job, shaping ideas for tax reform―like a value-added tax to fund education―that had no chance of getting passed. I wouldn't have predicted(预报) that Nixon's trip would form the basis(基础) of the U.S. relationship with China for the next 40 years or that it would ultimately(最后) have such a deep―and enriching(充实)―impact(影响) on my own life.

My first trip to Hong Kong came just after I had been named one of three co-heads of Goldman's investment(投资) banking division at the end of 1990. I was asked to take on responsibility(责任) for Asia because, living in Chicago, I was deemed(认为) “closer” than my New York colleagues. That will tell you how important Asia was to the firm's plans back then. Indeed, until the late '80s, we had had no business in China and not much more in Hong Kong. Then the firm moved Moses Tsang, a stellar(星的) bond(债券) salesman, back to his native Hong Kong. Moses had graduated from Bemidji State University in Minnesota, after which he had earned a master's in social work at the University of Iowa, before joining Goldman, where he sold bonds in New York, Tokyo, and London. In Hong Kong Moses quickly built a business selling U.S. bonds to local institutions and wealthy individuals(个人). By the early 1990s the firm had perhaps a hundred people in Hong Kong, nearly all in bond sales or trading. The banking side had only a handful of folks, and almost no business.

When I saw Hong Kong for myself, I was quickly captivated(迷住) by its beauty, its sleek(圆滑的) modernity(现代性) and pulsating(搏动) energy, and the straightforward(简单的) nature of local businessmen. Not long after, I flew to Beijing for the first time with Henry James, the partner who oversaw(看管) Asia from his office in Tokyo. What a contrast(对比) to sophisticated(复杂的) Hong Kong! The mainlanders, many of whom still wore Mao jackets buttoned to the neck, seemed like country bumpkins(土包子) compared with the worldly(世俗的) city dwellers(居住) of Hong Kong, who sported bespoke(定做的) European-cut suits fashioned by their famed(著名的) tailors. Beijing's streets were filled with bicycles, and riding in the quickly growing fleet(舰队) of automobiles(汽车) was harrowing(痛心的). I remember landing at the old airport and driving to our hotel on a single-lane road jammed with horses and carts(二轮运货马车), wobbly(不稳定的) bicycles, and speeding cars. The driving was so aggressive―ill-advised(没脑筋的) passing, horns(喇叭) honking(发雁鸣或汽车喇叭声)―I was relieved(解除) that we didn't get killed, or kill someone.

In those days, standing at the corner of Chang'an Avenue and the Second Ring Road, which circles central Beijing at a distance of just 3 miles from Tiananmen Square, you could see mule-drawn carts bringing in the winter cabbage. Looking out to the Third Ring Road, under construction another mile and a half distant, there were still swaths(细长的列) of hutongs(胡同), the characteristic(典型的) Beijing neighborhoods centered on narrow lanes(车道) and residential(住宅的) houses built around courtyards that had stood for hundreds of years.

All of this was quickly disappearing. On subsequent(后来的) visits I watched the old neighborhoods being torn(扯裂) down as fast as you could blink(眨眼), replaced by massive(大量的) buildings housing government ministries(部门) and office, residential, and hotel complexes(复体). The pace of change was stunning(极好的). Landmarks(陆标) seemingly disappeared between trips. As bewildering(使人困惑的) as it was to a visitor like me, it must have been deeply disconcerting(令人不安的) to the Chinese.

Yet the energy and work ethic(伦理)―and desire―that this change reflected(反映) was infectious(传染的). China's potential(潜能) struck me when I visited the special economic(经济的) zone in Shenzhen, in southern Guangdong Province, where I saw the amazing entrepreneurial(企业家的) spirit in action in factories and ranks of buildings under construction. The skyline was a forest of cranes(吊车); fields of bulldozers(强迫) waited to break ground for new buildings.

Shenzhen was a gold mine for Hong Kong entrepreneurs(企业家), who were pouring in money to start businesses they could run at almost no cost. The Chinese government took care of benefits(利益) and what little health care there was for the workers, who toiled(辛苦工作) round the clock. The Hong Kong manufacturers paid bare(空的) minimum(最小的) wages. They transferred(呼叫转移) their product at cost into Hong Kong, where they paid no corporate(法人的) taxes. They marked it up and shipped it to the world's consumers(消耗). How could you have a better deal than that?

The arrangement worked for the Chinese, too. I'm not minimizing(使减到最少) the dreadful(可怕的) working conditions in some factories―long hours, few if any bathroom breaks, poorly ventilated(通风的) factory floors―but millions of jobs were being created, and the economy(经济) was booming(兴旺的). For the first time, people had money to spend and plenty of appealing(呼吁) and desirable(令人满意的) goods to spend it on. People from all over Guangdong were flocking(用棉束填满) to the SEZs, and people all over the country were pouring into Guangdong and the other coastal(沿海的) provinces where the experimentation(实验) was most advanced.

To be sure, I was uneasy in the aftermath(后果) of the Tiananmen Square crackdown(镇压). I found it hard to shake the haunting(不易忘怀的) image of that lone, fragile-looking man with the string shopping bag standing in front of the tank, and I was deeply disturbed by the imposition(征收) of martial(军事的) law. The protesters(抗议) had sought(寻找) greater freedom, only to be denied(否定), harshly(严厉地), by their government.

But I believed then, and still do today, that U.S. engagement(婚约) with China makes sense―indeed, that more engagement, not less, is the better course, politically and economically(经济地). I was convinced(说服) that China was making hard, market-oriented(市场取向) choices to improve the welfare(福利) of its people, and that an increase in their standard of living would bring them closer to the world community and to achieving the freedoms we embrace(拥抱) in America. These ideals(理想) and rights may or may not come, but they are more likely to be achieved with prosperity(繁荣) than with grinding(磨的) poverty(贫困).

I'm a sucker for action, and the Chinese were nothing if not active. And frankly(真诚地), I have to say it was quite a refreshing(提神的) contrast to the gloomy(黑暗的) nay-saying that we had gotten(得到) used to back home in the States in the depths of the recession(衰退) that followed the savings and loan(贷款) debacle(崩溃). Maybe it was my na?veté and lack of sophistication(复杂), but I saw no reason the Chinese on the mainland should not aspire(渴望) to, or achieve, the success of their brethren(弟兄们) in Hong Kong and Taiwan. They would have to make big changes, but it was clear they were trying. I felt we could help them and help ourselves in the process.

I was not without my doubts, though. I remember one trip to Shanghai, when I had a Sunday afternoon to myself and took a long stroll(漫步) along the Bund. A prerevolution time capsule(压缩), the famous waterfront(滩) could have passed for Wall Street or the City of London of a bygone(过去的) era with its historic(有历史意义的) buildings running along the western bank of Huangpu River. This thoroughfare(大道) had been the home of Western and Chinese banks, trading houses, and markets, and they had all but disappeared in an instant after the revolution. The thought gave me pause. Many at Goldman, including such discerning(眼光敏锐的) executives(经理) as co-chairman(联合主席) Bob Rubin, asked tough, probing(探索) questions about China's prospects(前途), in no small part because it was never certain that the reforms(改革) would last. I had to ask myself: What makes me think it won't happen again, and how can I be sure Goldman Sachs won't lose its shirt investing(投资) here?


edit metadata
CHAPTER THREE

Dealmaking with Chinese Characteristics

Doubts about China inside Goldman Sachs reflected(反映) a vigorous(有力的) debate during the mid-1990s concerning(关于) the best long-term prospects(前途) in Asia. Some in the firm thought we should focus on the region's other developing economies(经济), the so-called Asian Tigers of Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan (not to mention other rising economies like Thailand(泰国), Indonesia, and Malaysia). These countries boasted(夸口说) growth stories that were every bit as spectacular(壮观的) as China's but less volatile(挥发性的), with more immediate business opportunities(时机) in some cases. Struck by the energy, enthusiasm(热心), and determination of the people, I was an ardent(热情的) proponent(支持者) of China's potential(潜能). I simply did the math in my head: as successful as all those countries were, together they had about one-third the population of China.

Initially, however, China was something of a sideshow(穿插表演). We focused our earliest efforts on building relationships in Hong Kong. We could see several benefits(利益) in doing so. China was courting the colony's business leaders prior(优先的) to the Handover. These merchant princes(王子) could read the writing on the wall and had been cultivating(培养) ties to the mainland and investing(投资) in all sorts of projects. They had thriving(繁荣的) businesses we could work with, and we could use them to piggyback(背着的) into China.

The most important businessman in Hong Kong was Li Ka-shing. K.S., as friends call him, had come to Hong Kong as a refugee(难民), and in his early 20s he started a business he named Cheung Kong, or Long River, after the Yangtze River. He made and sold plastic combs and soap boxes, progressing to toys and plastic flowers. He thrived and soon began investing in real estate(房地产) and eventually(最后) emerged(浮现) as the biggest developer in the colony(殖民地). In 1979 he acquired(获得) the venerable(庄严的) conglomerate(砾岩) Hutchison Whampoa, with interests in ports, retailing(零售业), and property, and subsequently(随后) expanded(扩充的) into new areas like telecommunications(通讯) while building a portfolio(公文包) in China. By 1990 he was a billionaire(亿万富翁) and considered the richest man in Hong Kong.

One day in 1991 I went with Moses Tsang, Goldman's man on the ground in Hong Kong, to meet K.S. for the first time. We were whisked(拂) in a private elevator(电梯) to his offices in the Central District, high over the city. K.S. greeted us warmly, and we chatted amiably(亲切地) in a side area of couches(睡椅) and chairs before moving to a large round table set for lunch with elegant(高雅的) menu cards.

K.S. had two sons, Victor and Richard. Victor(胜利者) worked at Cheung Kong, while Richard, the youngest and still in his early 20s, was in the process of launching(发射) Star TV, a pioneering satellite programming venture(企业) focused on China and other Asian countries. I don't remember now whether either of them was present, but we were joined by K.S.'s key deputy(代理人), Canning Fok, a former Hong Kong high school classmate of Moses's, who had arranged our meeting. Before we went in, Moses had mentioned that K.S. was raising funds for Richard's TV business.

I was impressed by K.S.'s direct manner and incisiveness(敏锐) as we engaged(吸引) in a wide-ranging conversation about markets and economic(经济的) conditions in Hong Kong, China, and the U.S. He was shrewd(精明的), sophisticated(复杂的), and global in outlook. He was staunchly(坚定地) anti-Communist but a realist(现实主义者) and immensely(极大地) pragmatic(实际的). As I would learn in time, he was also a wise businessman who appreciated the value of a conservative balance sheet with plenty of cash and liquidity(流动性) in a world he knew from personal experience to be uncertain and frequently volatile.

Sure enough, the subject of Star TV, which was being developed out of Hutchison Whampoa, popped(被逮捕的) up. Straight out, K.S. asked Goldman Sachs to spend $2 million to buy advertising on it. He certainly did not need the money, and the amount(数量) in absolute(绝对的) terms was trivial(不重要的) for him. I saw it even then as a symbolic(象征的) gesture, but one that was very important to him because he wanted his son's first business venture to succeed.

By nature I'm pretty straightforward(简单的), but I hedged(用树篱笆围住), saying that we would have to get back to him. This was for a very good reason: I had absolutely no authority(权威) to make such a commitment(承诺) on behalf(代表) of the firm. We were a conservative partnership(合伙), and I knew this would lead to a difficult discussion within the management committee(委员会), of which I was a member. But I didn't want to offend(冒犯) the most powerful businessman in Hong Kong.

After lunch K.S. walked me to the elevator and rode down with me, a gesture of such politeness(有礼貌) and familiarity(熟悉) that I soon found myself adopting(采取) it with Asian visitors back home. I thanked him for the lunch and told him I was grateful for the opportunity and that we would weigh and examine it.

“Thank you, Mr. Paulson,” I remember K.S. saying as I slid(滑) into the car. “I am pleased Goldman Sachs will be taking the advertising package from Star TV.”

Back home my colleagues wasted no time in telling me that K.S. had put one over on me. But we were late to Hong Kong, and I had concluded that if we were to catch up and accomplish(完成) what we wanted to, we needed to make a commitment. I expected that it would lead to the opportunity to invest in future deals with K. S. Li and his family and to compete for investment(投资) banking business. In the U.S. some clients were nervous if you wanted to invest with them. In Hong Kong it was the opposite. Putting your money on the line alongside(在…旁边) your clients' earned you their trust and admitted you to the club. I viewed this as a first step in that direction. That was what I tried to explain to the Goldman management committee. It wasn't an easy sell. As a firm that focused primarily on institutional(制度的) and corporate(法人的) clients, we had no interest in advertising to the general public. But eventually they went along, and we donated(捐赠) our Star TV advertising to the Children's Cancer Foundation in Hong Kong.

As it turned out, one of the first significant(重大的) deals we did in Hong Kong took place shortly afterward when we helped Richard Li sell Star TV to Rupert Murdoch. That came about after a chance meeting between John Thornton, then head of banking in Europe out of London, and Richard Li at a World Economic ForumCrelated event at Davos in 1992. A little later Star began talking to our people about raising funds through a private placement(布置)―an opportunity that would not have arisen without our decision to buy advertising. Jumping on this opening, John flew to Hong Kong to persuade Richard that he would be better served by finding a strategic(战略上的) investor(投资者). He had in mind Rupert Murdoch, with whom Richard and K.S. had previously failed at least twice to reach an agreement. John turned for help to Brian Griffiths, who was vice(副的) chairman of Goldman Sachs International. Lord(主) Griffiths sat on the board of Times Newspaper Holdings, the parent company of Murdoch's Times in London. The three had dinner, and John managed over the next few weeks to bring Richard and Rupert to a meeting of the minds, while keeping Pearson PLC, a rival(竞争的) U.K. media conglomerate, in play as a competing bidder. The deal, announced in July 1993, had Murdoch buying 63.6 percent of HutchVision Limited, the parent of Star TV, for about $525 million. (He would buy the remainder(剩余的) two years later.)

The deal was a stunner(震惊). It brought Murdoch to Asia and instantly elevated(提高的) Richard Li in the public eye, confirming(确认) that he had the makings of a shrewd businessman. He'd made several times over the initial investment and was launched on a high-flying career(事业).

We subsequently did quite a lot of work for K.S. and his companies, helping him to finance, buy, and sell a number of businesses. Making a simple $2 million commitment didn't win us these other assignments(分配). K.S. was too good a businessman for that: we had to earn every bit of work we did for him. But it did get us a seat at the table so we could compete for the business, and it helped to make our name in Hong Kong, and later in China.

This isn't to say we got the deals we wanted or that the ones we got all worked out so well. Oriental Plaza, the Beijing mega-development on the prime(主要的) piece of real estate(房地产) right next to Tiananmen Square, would go through numerous(许多的) iterations(迭代) as it became increasingly complicated(难懂的) and controversial(有争议的). The billion-dollar-plus project broke ground in September 1993 but came to a halt(停止) the next year amid(在其中) protests(抗议) from preservationists(保护主义者) and resistance(阻力) from McDonald's, which had earlier signed a 20-year lease(租约) and opened its first franchise(特权) in Beijing on that very site. Eventually(最后的), matters were sorted out. McDonald's agreed to move. K. S. Li, who had replaced C. H. Tung as the lead investor(投资者), pressed ahead, and the development opened for business in 2000. Along the way, our nearC20 percent stake(桩) was whittled(削) away to almost nothing, and we made very little.

The circuitous(迂曲的) path of Oriental Plaza was not atypical(非典型的) for the deals we encountered(遭遇) when we first started. We discovered quickly the need to be very selective(选择性的) about the business we pursued(继续) and never to take anything for granted(算是如此). That's a wise approach(方法) the world over but nowhere more so than it was in China during that early period of rapid economic(经济的) change. As the country opened to foreign investment(投资), almost every transaction(交易) was debated at the highest levels of government; the decision making was complex(复杂的), diffuse(扩散) in that it involved(包含) the approval(批准) of many officials, and opaque(不透明的) to outsiders like us. Many memoranda(备忘录) of understanding were signed that went nowhere; informal(非正式的) negotiations(谈判) took place with officials who lacked proper authority(权威) or couldn't “sell” projects to their superiors(上级). Moreover, China lacked a strong adherence(坚持) to the rule of law. Instead, the rule of men was the norm(规范), which meant that building strong personal relationships was essential for doing business. For this reason, I traveled frequently to China, especially in the early years. Over time we learned to identify(确定) the most viable(可行的) transactions, involving the right clients and the support of the right Chinese advocates(提倡者). But on any number of occasions(时机) as we were learning to work in China in the early days, we were disappointed by abrupt(生硬的) and bewildering(使人困惑的) changes in direction. The rug could be pulled out from under you at any point.

We learned this lesson firsthand(直接的) in our efforts to help build the Chinese power industry. From the start this opportunity(时机) had looked like a no-brainer. The fast-growing economy(经济) made increasing energy demands that China was struggling to meet, especially in areas like Shandong and Guangdong, two densely(浓密地) populated(粒子数增加的) coastal(沿海的) provinces that were rapidly industrializing(工业化) and relatively open to foreign investment. Guangdong, across the border from Hong Kong, suffered frequent brownouts(使电灯暗淡)―an untenable(站不住脚的) situation for factories working round the clock to manufacture goods being shipped all over the world.

We devised(设计) a solution(解决方案), borrowed from the U.S. In simple terms, the idea was to sell a stake in one power plant to a group of foreign investors who would become owners of the plant in tandem(串联) with the government. This new ownership group would use the proceeds(收入) to finance the construction of additional(附加的) power plants. The financing was straightforward(简单的), but we knew arranging the deals would be tricky(狡猾的). Provincial(省的) governments were generally more willing to experiment than were central government agencies(代理), but it would still require political courage and savvy(悟性) maneuvering(机动) to push ahead, as the country had never sold part of a state-owned power station to foreigners before.

Tom Gibian, a Goldman Sachs project finance specialist, identified suitable power plants, and by early 1993 we had committed(犯罪) with a well-connected state-owned investment entity(实体), China Venturetech Investment Corporation (CVIC), to invest(投资) in electric generating(产生的) projects. Our efforts in Shandong moved ahead quickly. In November, after winning approval from the China Securities Regulatory Commission(委员会) (CSRC), China's version of the U.S.'s Securities and Exchange Commission, we and CVIC announced that, along with other investors, including K. S. Li and U.S. engineering and construction concern(关系) Bechtel, we would pay $180 million for a 30 percent share of a 1.2 million kilowatt(千瓦) power plant, Shandong's biggest. It would be run through a new company jointly(共同地) owned by the investors, the power corporation of Shandong Province, and Shandong International Trust and Investment Corporation.

Then the lights on the deal went out. At a conference in Beijing, Gibian gave a presentation that laid out the structure(结构) of the deal in detail, including the expected returns for investors―just under 13 percent annually(每年) over the first 12 years―necessary to get the deal done.

In the audience was a woman named Li Xiaolin, a young power industry bureaucrat(官僚), who happened to be the daughter of Li Peng, the country's premier(第一的), and a leading conservative opponent(对手) of rapid reform(改革). The next thing we knew, we had been instructed to pull the deal. As we were told, Li Peng was unhappy about the high rate of return to the foreign investors. The Shandong power deal was canceled in December 1993.

We came away with a crucial(重要的) lesson: many officials could approve(批准) a deal, but it took only one well-placed official in a consensus-ruled system to kill it. We subsequently(随后) learned to spread our efforts wide to every conceivable(可能的) person or agency that might have an interest in whatever we were focused on and to work relentlessly(残酷地) to bring them to our side. For a complex, groundbreaking(动工) transaction like the Shangdong deal, in a politically sensitive(敏感的) area where the premier had a keen(敏锐的) interest, we should have sought(寻找) the approval of the State Council, which is composed(构成) of China's senior government ministers. Even today the Chinese are not great at coordinating(调整) among themselves; and in the early 1990s the government approval process for novel policies(政策) was very much a work in progress.

Li Peng's intervention(介入) also served as a graphic(图表的) reminder of the intersection(交叉) of power and family ties in China as the economy was being remade(重造). Apart(相距) from being premier, Li had had a long association(协会) with the power industry, and his daughter and one of his sons would become heavyweights(重量级拳击手) in that sector(部门) as well. This was the first inkling(暗示) I had of the growing influence of the children of Party leaders. Capitalizing(资本化) on family connections was common. Many sons and daughters of Party leaders, the so-called princelings(幼君), were bright, able, and held productive(能生产的) and legitimate(合法的) jobs. But many did not, and rampant(猖獗的) nepotism(裙带关系) had become an open sore(疼痛的), enraging(激怒) the Chinese public; its patent(专利的) unfairness(不公平) stood in stark(完全的) contrast(对比) to the Chinese tradition(惯例) of strict meritocracy(英才教育) that governs ordinary citizens, whose futures are determined by their performance in a brutally(残忍地) competitive(竞争的) exam system.

As frustrating as it was at the time, our Shandong power setback(挫折) did reveal(显示) a rewarding aspect(方面) of doing business in China: the Chinese have a great sense of honor and stick to their word when a commitment(承诺) is made. A CEO has every right to kill an unfinished deal that he decides isn't in the best interests of his company. Just so, a head of state can back out of an agreement that doesn't serve his country well. When such a reversal(逆转) occurs, few countries would see a need to do anything more than offer a quick apology, if that. But China is different. Even as Li Peng flabbergasted(哑然失色) us by killing the deal, others assured(保证) us that we would get Shandong's future business when that became possible. Liu Hongru, a forward-looking and committed reformer who was the head of the CSRC and in charge of handing out the first mandates(授权) to take Chinese state-owned enterprises public, promised that we would handle the power company's IPO. And, in fact, we were awarded(授予) the mandate in 1994―although it was no walk in the park. Shandong International Power Development Company finally listed in Hong Kong in June 1999 after a very long, difficult process that involved no fewer than three failed road shows, in which bankers and company management traveled to many distant cities to interest investors in the offerings.

As Li Peng's involvement(牵连) in the Shandong deal taught my partners and me, Chinese leaders were intimately(熟悉地) involved in the minutiae(微小) of the economy and the changes the reform program was producing. It was the inevitable(必然的) legacy(遗赠) of a command economy―the top people were involved by design―and reflected(反映) the importance of the direction-setting decisions they were making for the country.

As a result, it was easier in the 1990s for foreign businessmen to meet senior leaders and develop relationships. That was not so later on. It was next to impossible, for example, for a businessperson to gain an audience with Hu Jintao after he became general secretary in 2002. It was a bit easier to see Premier Wen Jiabao, although I don't believe he discussed specific(特殊的) transactions. This shift(移动) was not just a matter of personal style but the result of a great sea change: as the economy boomed(兴旺), it was no longer necessary for the country's leaders to court the foreign CEOs, who were beating down doors to build a business in China. The top leadership(领导能力) also had more help. The government was becoming professionalized(专业化) as more capable(能干的) and experienced officials populated the ministries(部门) and senior ranks of the state.

One of the senior leaders I saw frequently in the 1990s was Zhu Rongji, then vice(副的) premier running the economy day-to-day. Our meetings generally concerned financial(金融的) or economic policy matters. He was smart, well briefed, and focused on finding solutions.

Zhu Rongji had come by his stature(身高) the hard way. After a tough childhood in Hunan Province, he had graduated from the prestigious(有名望的) Tsinghua University as an engineer in 1951 and landed a job with a central government planning agency. Always outspoken(坦率的), he'd been purged(净化) twice during Mao's political upheavals(剧变). But he was a man of fortitude(刚毅) and persistence(持续). After the Cultural Revolution he returned to Beijing and worked for an economic reform commission before moving to Shanghai as mayor(市长) in 1987. There he set up China's first official stock exchange since the Communists had come to power. He also led the effort to turn Pudong, the Singapore-size expanse(宽阔) of vegetable farms and marshes(沼泽) east of the Bund, into China's spanking(打…的屁股) new financial center, complete with the country's tallest skyscrapers.

Zhu was direct and no-nonsense(严肃的) and, at least with me, a good listener who took blunt(钝的) advice well when he thought it was in China's best interest. We were advising the country on its sovereign(至高无上的) credit rating in 1993, and I sat in on the meeting with the U.S. rating agency Standard & Poor's. I felt that Zhu had not addressed one of the agency's concerns about China as directly as he might have. To the dismay(沮丧) of one colleague, I explained this to Zhu in a matter-of-fact(实事求是的) but respectful(恭敬的) way after the meeting. He was silent, which my colleagues took as a bad sign. But Zhu was pragmatic(实际的) to his core, and at a subsequent meeting with Moody's Investors Service he handled the same question frankly(真诚地) and adroitly(熟练地).

Zhu and other Chinese leaders were keen to list state-owned enterprises on the world's stock markets. Privatization(私有化) was still a somewhat new concept(观念) then, but the Chinese were quick to see its potential(潜能) for raising capital and restructuring(调整) industries. Zhu had already met with our Brian Griffiths, who had led Margaret Thatcher's privatization and deregulation(违反规定) efforts from 1985 to 1990, as well as with other Goldman executives(经理). In my first meeting with Zhu, he asked us to do a feasibility(可行性) study of which industries would be the best candidates(候选人). And he asked me how long it would take to list a company on the New York Stock Exchange.

“Between six months and two years,” I replied.

But getting Chinese companies ready for public listings was a daunting(使人畏缩的) task―one far more difficult than I would have imagined. China's state-owned enterprises had grown out of the ministries that, under Communist Party rule, had owned all the property and assets(资产) of the nation and had overseen(视察) all of its commercial(商业的) operations and activities, from oil and gas exploration(探测) and drilling to farming, manufacturing, and mining. The state determined what businesses to be in and set quotas(配额) for production. Product quality, managerial(管理的) controls, and accounting were neglected(疏忽).

As the economy had opened up, SOEs had grown like mad. But they remained under government control and were weighed down by all the baggage of the state, including expensive cradle-to-grave(一辈子的) care for workers and their families. Companies maintained(维持) hospitals, schools, restaurants, stores, and even, in some cases, cemeteries(墓地) for their employees(雇员), and they were proud of the services they provided. I remember Brian Griffiths remarking after a visit to one of these companies that it resembled(类似) nothing so much as a medieval(中世纪的) village, and, as he put it, “You can't float that on the New York Stock Exchange.”

By the 1990s, while the fledgling(无经验的人) private sector of the economy―foreign-invested ventures(企业), SEZ exporters(输出物资), and the township(镇区) and village enterprises―thrived(繁荣), most of the SOEs had become bloated(发胀的) and inefficient(无效率的), debt ridden and money losing. They had almost no knowledge of modern business practices and offered such primitive(原始的) disclosure(披露) that it was almost impossible to measure the extent(程度) of their economic losses. Managers had been given greater responsibility(责任) to make business decisions, but they often had neither the training nor the temperament(气质) for the task. Companies lacked focus and squandered(浪费) resources. In the first flush(激动) of freedom, executives frequently made misguided or corrupt(腐败的) decisions, creating inchoate(早期的) conglomerates(砾岩), speculating(推测) in real estate, and acting as quasi-banks to extend(延伸) credit ill-advisedly(没脑筋的) to other companies.

To make matters worse, the state-owned banks that loaned(借出) to these lumbering(伐木) SOEs were for all practical purposes defunct(死者). They had little knowledge of modern lending, investing(熔模铸造), or risk-management practices and had no idea of the extent(程度) of their bad loans, or even how to value their assets(资产) or measure their losses. Moreover, the banks were regulated(调节) at the local level by the same officials who directed them to lend to the SOEs. You can imagine how ineffective(无效的) it was to have provincial(省的) politicians overseeing the banks and inspecting the adequacy(足够) of their capital while they were simultaneously(同时地) seeking loans for their pet projects.

Zhu wanted to overhaul(分解检查) the way the SOEs were managed, eliminate(消除) their special privileges(特权) and subsidies(补贴), and encourage the development of professional managers to invigorate(鼓舞) the state sector(部门). Selling shares to the public and “strategic(战略上的)” stakes(桩) to leading international companies, he felt, would not only raise capital but also force the SOEs to adopt(采取) global accounting standards and become better run. He also recognized that to reform(改革) the SOEs, he would have to reform the banking system that, essentially, provided the companies with the corporate(法人的) version of an iron rice bowl: unending credit and absolute(绝对的) loan forgiveness(宽恕).

At the time, governments around the world were undertaking(承担) privatizations(私有化) for a variety of reasons―from restructuring(调整) assets to make their domestic(国内的) industries more competitive(竞争的) to raising money, paying down debts, or broadening(加宽的) share ownership. Germany, for one, was eager to create an equity(公平) culture. Some governments took the view that their companies would perform better with market discipline(学科) than under state ownership and control.

The Chinese embraced(拥抱) a model of their own design. To begin with, they were uncomfortable(不舒服的) with the term “privatization,” which didn't completely square with “socialism with Chinese characteristics(特征).” They preferred to use the terms “corporatization(公司化)” and “capital restructuring.” Government leaders chose to maintain(维持) control of companies whose shares they sold in a wide range of industries, keeping them under the Party, which handpicked(偏心挑选的) company leaders. I didn't know then if this was a temporary(暂时的) or long-term plan. But over time, their reluctance(磁阻) to surrender(投降) state control has become clearer, and that desire, firmly rooted in politics and ideology(意识形态), carries negative(负的) consequences(结果) to this day. Too many of the country's biggest businesses, descended(出身于…的) from massive(大量的) government ministries(部门), stalk(茎) the Chinese landscape(风景), creating problems for the government as it attempts to develop best-of-class global companies and to shift(移动) to a different economic(经济的) model that is not so dependent(依靠的) on government investment(投资) and exports(出口商品). And these companies are not being run according to Zhu's plan to make them modern, efficient(有效率的), market-driven enterprises subject to real competition.

China's interest in privatizations drew the attention of investment banks the world over. For quite a while, Goldman had to play catch-up. British firms like Jardine Fleming, Schroders, and Barings, with their colonial(殖民地的) histories in Hong Kong, initially had the upper hand, along with Wardley, the merchant banking arm of HSBC, and Peregrine Investments, a well-connected local start-up. But we sensed the vulnerability(易损性) of the old-line(历史悠久的) firms. They were already in decline(下降) before the Handover, which would end their historical(历史的) edge. Among our U.S. competitors, Merrill Lynch and Morgan Stanley had also established(确定的) themselves ahead of us.

Much of what we did in China in those early days was educational(教育的). We might as well have been running a school―indeed, at times it felt as though we were. Even as our bankers sought(寻找) to build relationships and sniff(嗅) out business opportunities(时机), they conducted seminars(讨论会) and conferences, gave tutorials(个别指导) in which they explained the benefits(利益) of privatization, analyzed(分解) Chinese industries, singled out the companies that could be floated on overseas(海外的) exchanges, and explained such technical details in the IPO process as due diligence(勤奋), book building, and managing a road show.

All of this was absolutely essential. As smart and capable(能干的) as the Chinese were, few officials in government ministries, or frankly(真诚地) in the country's fledgling(无经验的人) financial(金融的) system, had any grounding in classical economics(经济学), much less hands-on experience in modern banking or capital markets. But they were absolute sponges(海绵), taking notes, soaking(浸湿) in information, constantly pressing for more details, more analyses(分析).

We rapidly built up our Hong Kong office to serve as the hub of our Asian activities outside of Japan. The region was booming(兴旺的), and by 1994 we had several hundred bankers and support staff(职员) managing our operations throughout Southeast Asia. We began to build our China team. Just as we did elsewhere(在别处), we looked for talented(有才能的) young professionals we could train to become outstanding(杰出的) investment bankers.

Some competitors hired employees(雇员) for their language skills rather than their banking aptitude(天资), or picked up natives of Taiwan and Hong Kong because they were “Chinese.” We looked for ones who could thrive(繁荣) in our competitive but collegial(学院的) Goldman culture.

We sought out bright mainland Chinese like Liu Erh Fei, who had earned degrees from Brandeis University and Harvard Business School as one of the first Chinese students to study abroad. Erh Fei was the first of our serious hires of Chinese bankers and very helpful in building our early mainland relationships. When he left in 1993, we hired Cherry Li, who had taught English at the Beijing Foreign Language Institute―Erh Fei had been one of her students―before switching(转换) to economics. Smart and dedicated(致力), she had worked for the State Council's Economic Reform Commission under reformist(改革者) premier(第一的) Zhao Ziyang and had been an early recruit(补充) at the CSRC. After a short stint(节约) in our New York headquarters(总部) to learn about our culture and our business, she opened our Beijing office in February 1994. We added a Shanghai office that November, but the bulk(体积) of our work in China continued to be run out of Hong Kong.

The business climate in China was frustrating. We were able to underwrite(给…保险) bonds(债券) for a number of government issuers, and we found some advisory(咨询的) work, but the equity offerings were slow in coming. In January 1994 the CSRC announced a second batch(一批) of 22 candidates(候选人) for overseas listings that included several power companies, but by the time the last company from the first batch had listed in Hong Kong in June 1994, IPOs of Chinese companies were having a much harder time attracting investors(投资者). One reason was the poor quality of the assets being offered in some of the later companies.

Another reason for our frustration(挫折) was the volatility(挥发性) of the Chinese economy(经济), which had begun overheating(过热) after Deng's Southern Tour. After credit controls were eased, bank lending for investment jumped 50 percent in 1992, and inflation(膨胀) hit 15 percent the following year. Speculative(投机的) real estate(房地产) projects mushroomed in Guangdong and Hainan, the island south of Guangdong and China's southernmost(最南的) province. Zhu Rongji, who had become vice(副的) premier in 1991, gained greater control over the economy after Li Peng suffered a heart attack in April 1993. Zhu's challenge was to find a way to calm the economy without losing ground on reform. His approach(方法) was to tackle(处理) both the immediate crisis(危机) and fundamental(基本的) problems in the economy.

Zhu took direct charge of the central bank and instituted a 16-point austerity(紧缩) plan to curb(控制) bank lending and restrain(抑制) price rises. He pushed through the first phase(相) of a revamping(修补) of the financial system by setting up three new policy(政策) banks and pressing the other banks to be more commercial(商业的) and less policy oriented(适应) in their loan choices. He overhauled the tax and fiscal(会计的) system and made foreign exchange reforms. Zhu was tough-minded, threatening(威胁), it was said, to “chop(砍) off the head” of any bank official who did not obey the new rules coming out of Beijing. Zhu and his reformist colleagues had a battle on their hands. Excessive(过多的) expansion(膨胀) of the money supply and a credit bubble(气泡) helped push inflation above 24 percent in 1994, before Zhu's stringent(严厉的) measures took effect and led the economy to a soft landing, with inflation falling to 8.3 percent in 1996 and 2.8 percent in 1997.

Meantime(其时), the bottom fell out for Goldman Sachs in 1994―but it wasn't China's fault. A global bond market meltdown(灾难), triggered(引发) by rapid interest rate hikes(远足) by the U.S. Federal Reserve in February 1994, caused our poorly managed trading business in London to blow up. We were soon losing $100 million a month. This firm-wide financial crisis was compounded(合成) by our partnership(合伙) structure(组织), which allowed retiring partners to take half their capital with them. Many did. The firm was on the edge of going under.

Then, in September, in the midst(当中) of this crisis, Jon Corzine and I were appointed(任命) to lead the firm as chairman and vice chairman, respectively(分别地). Jon and I disagreed about a lot but not about the need to act fast. We had to make tough decisions and cut staff by 13 percent worldwide. I tried to protect our business in Asia, especially China, but we had to slash(猛砍) hard to ensure(保证) our survival(幸存), and in the end I'm not sure we were worse off by cutting back, because we had grown rapidly around the world and hired a lot of the wrong people.


CHAPTER FOUR

Real Gold and Silver

The 15th National Congress of the Communist Party, held in September 1997, cemented(渗碳的) the path of economic(经济的) reform(改革) in China. To counter uneasiness(不安) in some quarters about the rapidly growing role of private enterprise, Chinese leader Jiang Zemin asserted(维护) that the Party did not have to control all aspects(方面) of the economy(经济) to stay true to its identity(身份).

“Even if the state-owned sector(部门) accounts for a smaller proportion(比例) of the economy,” he declared, “this will not affect the socialist nature of our country.” Jiang's argument encouraged the private sector to flourish(夸耀), while setting the stage for the next crucial(重要的) phase(相) of economic reform―restructuring(调整) the creaky(发辗的), money-losing state-owned enterprises that employed 110 million workers and accounted for nearly 30 percent of industrial(工业的) GDP. In his speech titled, in part, “Hold High the Great Banner of Deng Xiaoping Theory,” Jiang vowed(发誓) to reduce these lumbering(伐木) dinosaurs in number and restructure them through mergers(合并), layoffs(裁员), technological(技术的) upgradings, and sales of stock.

At the time, all eyes were on one state-owned enterprise: China Telecom(电信), which was scheduled(安排) to make an unprecedented(空前的) initial public offering of its shares in Hong Kong and New York in just weeks. The $4.22 billion deal was constructed around the mobile telecommunications(通讯) assets(资产) of two thriving(繁荣的) Chinese coastal(沿海的) provinces, but because of the complex(复杂的), scattered(分散的) nature of the country's telecom system, a marketable(市场的) company had had to be built from scratch(擦伤).

The IPO showed the firm hand of Zhu Rongji, who meant for China Telecom to become the template(模板) for revamping(修补) other SOEs. The battle-hardened vice(恶习) premier(总理) knew the devil(魔鬼) of reform was in the details, and he understood that the IPO process could press change on companies whose managers were not otherwise up to the task, while reorganizing(整理) entire industries and their regulators(调整者). Doing so would help clear the roadblocks(路障) to China's long-delayed entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and better prepare the country for the eventual(最后的) opening to foreign competition that would follow.

But China was by no means united behind Zhu's efforts; he faced factional(小派别的) and ideological(思想的) opposition(反对)―and inertia(惯性). If China Telecom's IPO failed, it could cripple(削弱) the country's move to a more open, market-oriented(市场取向) system. Unfortunately, the markets had turned ugly, and China Telecom was set to go public in the midst(当中) of the worst economic crisis(危机) to hit Asia in a generation. Goldman Sachs was leading the deal, and on the hook.

The stakes(桩) could hardly have been higher. The future of China's reforms―and our reputation(名声)―hung in the balance.

Ironically(讽刺的), Goldman Sachs had won the China Telecom business in part because of another deal that we'd turned down. In the early 1990s Goldman had been asked to help create a Chinese investment(投资) bank by entering into a joint(共同的) venture(企业) with a major Chinese commercial(商业的) bank. We badly wanted to break into the market and to operate with wider latitude(纬度) than we could as an adviser or investor(投资者), but there was a hitch(故障) to the proposal(提议): Goldman would only be allowed to own roughly one-third of the firm. Some of my colleagues liked the idea. They saw our being asked as a great coup(政变) that would lead to more business. I argued strongly against it. I didn't want any part of running a business we did not control.

I didn't see how we could be successful, guarantee(保证) Goldman Sachs quality and execution(执行), maintain(维持) our integrity(完整), and obey the law in a country like China with only a minority position. It's hard enough to run an institution―hiring, training, and putting together performance evaluation(评价) and compensation(补偿) systems that reinforce(加强) a culture of teamwork, client service, and high ethical(伦理的) standards―when you're all under one roof in New York. But halfway(到一半) around the world with our employees(雇员) answering to non-Goldman executives(经理)? No way.

So we turned down the proposal.

Morgan Stanley took our place, forming China International Capital Corporation with China Construction Bank to great fanfare(吹牛) in 1995. And in short order, our archrivals walked straight into the bear trap we'd foreseen(预见). I got a glimpse(一瞥) of how serious those problems had become in September 1996, when Wang Qishan, then head of CCB, visited me at Goldman's offices in New York.

I'd met Wang a couple of times by then and had shared a memorable(显著的) dinner with him. A committed(坚定的) reformer, Wang Qishan was a savvy(悟性) up-and-comer(有前途的人) with impeccable(无瑕疵的) connections. My wife, Wendy, had joined me on this trip, and along with a Goldman colleague, we'd met Wang at a restaurant in Beijing. Even speaking through a translator, Wendy and Wang Qishan hit it off. Wang was extraordinarily well read; he and Wendy traded theories of education and dissected(切开的) Chinese, European, and American history and culture while Chinese pop videos played nonstop on a corner TV. Finally, Wang said to Wendy, “Excuse me, Mrs. Paulson. May I borrow your husband for a while?” and we turned the discussion to the state of the economy and prospects(前途) for reform in China. Because of his bank's connection with Morgan Stanley, I viewed him as a competitor, although an unusually charming(迷人的) one.

So I was unprepared for what happened when Wang walked into my office in New York a couple of years later. First, he outlined(概述) China's plans to reform its telecom sector and sell shares through an IPO, confirming(确认) reports we'd heard earlier that summer that the government was looking for the privatization(私有化) to happen soon―perhaps around the time of the July 1, 1997, Handover of Hong Kong to China.

It was a deal every investment bank wanted to win. The China Telecom offering promised to be a transformational(转换的) event. Apart(相距) from raising capital, it would “brand” China in global markets and pave(铺设) the way for the sale of shares in other state-owned enterprises. It would also mark the beginning of a wider restructuring of the nation's communications infrastructure(基础设施). It was easy to foresee additional(附加的) activity―equity(公平) and debt financings, mergers and acquisitions(获得物)―as the Chinese telecom market grew and took a more modern shape.

As the leading Chinese investment bank, CICC was going to be very involved(有关的) in the transaction(交易), Wang pointed out. Then he dropped a bombshell(炸弹) on me.

“We need a leading global bank on the deal,” he said, “and I would like that to be Goldman Sachs.”

“We'd like nothing more than to work with you,” I quickly responded(回答). But I couldn't refrain(节制) from adding, “I don't see how you're going to be able to do this with us while Morgan Stanley is your partner.”

“I understand your point,” Wang said simply. “But I've decided to work with Goldman Sachs.”

Wang's pronouncement(声明) surprised me. Whatever problems the Chinese might be having with Morgan Stanley―and we had picked up rumors(谣言) of infighting(近击) at CICC―they remained partners, and I assumed(假定的) Morgan Stanley still had the inside track for a deal.

Wang Qishan was the head of China Construction Bank, not the head of the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications(电讯), the actual client. But as another of my Goldman colleagues would later say of Wang, “He was never just a banker.” When it came to China Telecom(电信), what mattered was not that he was the head of CCB. What mattered was that he had gotten(得到) the assignment(分配) to take China Telecom public from Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, who wanted this deal to lead the way for the reform(改革) and restructuring(调整) of the country's massive(大量的) state-owned enterprises. Wang was working for Zhu and China, and he would make his decisions accordingly. Zhu depended on a network of allies and protégés, men and women committed(犯罪) to reform, who had the drive and executive(行政的) ability to cut through bureaucratic(官僚的) lethargy(昏睡) and overcome(克服) political opposition(反对) to push forward changes while time and momentum(势头) were on their side. And Wang Qishan was emerging(浮现) as one of Zhu's key lieutenants(中尉).

Why were the Chinese upset with Morgan Stanley? My sense is it came down to culture and communication: the two sides approached(接近) their joint(共同的) venture(企业) with different expectations, and neither completely understood what the other wanted. Perhaps Morgan Stanley wanted to run a successful local operation, pursuing(继续) domestic(国内的) business that purely foreign banks couldn't touch. That's the leg up the joint venture gave them. Wang Qishan had bigger game in mind: he wanted to modernize(现代化) a country. As one of China's top dealmakers(交易人) later explained to me, Wang Qishan didn't much care whether CICC made money at first. Success would be measured by how much CICC helped China's reform process.

Where Morgan Stanley saw CICC as a domestic Chinese operation, the Chinese saw it as their flagship(旗舰) global merchant bank. Wang Qishan was thinking about how a Chinese financial(金融的) institution could grow globally and become a peer(贵族) of Western investment(投资) banks. When Wang and Fang Fenglei, CICC's deputy(代理人) CEO, approached Morgan Stanley about doing the China Telecom deal, they were told that the New York bank had its own channels in China and did not need its partner to do an international listing. Morgan Stanley's bankers were skeptical(怀疑的) that a China Telecom IPO would get done, and even if it did, they expected the deal size to be small. That was not what the Chinese had in mind.

The lesson I drew was that you need to listen hard to what your counterpart(副本) is really saying they want―and, if it's not unreasonable or unethical(不道德的), do your best to meet their objectives(目的) or convince(说服) them they can't be met. That's true anywhere, but especially in China, where it's so easy to use the same words and phrases and yet mean very different things. You may think you have the same purpose in doing a joint venture, but it turns out your partner's interested in something entirely different.

Even the word partner may have been a source of misunderstanding. The Chinese, as I learned later, viewed the joint venture as a minority investment by Morgan Stanley, which would train their Chinese counterparts and receive a few privileges(特权) in return. But the Chinese side had total control and wanted to be deferred(推迟) to and treated almost as if it were a client. Morgan Stanley understandably(可理解地) thought of CICC as a partner that would rely(依靠) largely on it to manage the JV despite(尽管) its having only a minority position.

Not having entered into a JV with the Chinese, we found it easier to treat them as a client. We understood that all roads would pass through CICC and that it would benefit(有益于) us to get close to its people. At first nobody would deal with us because of the firm's relationship with Morgan Stanley. Nobody, that is, except Fang Fenglei, who happened to be the most important person there.

Fang was simply one of the most extraordinary people I'd met in China. Persistent(固执的) and inventive(发明的), a preternatural(超自然的) networker in a country of networkers, he was born in 1952 near Mao Zedong's hometown in Hunan Province and grew up in Beijing. His parents were Communist Party members and midlevel government officials. Like so many of his generation, Fang and his family suffered during the Cultural Revolution. His father and older brother were imprisoned(监禁), and he was jailed(监禁的) for three months at the age of 16 for protesting(抗议) their treatment. After his release he was shipped to Inner Mongolia, where he worked as a farmer and shepherd for two years; he then spent five years in the army, followed by two years in an electrical equipment factory.

After the Cultural Revolution ended, Fang secured(保护) a spot at the prestigious(有名望的) Sun Yat-sen University, also known as Zhongshan University, in Guangzhou. After graduation he joined the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic(经济的) Cooperation, now the Ministry of Commerce. He was seconded to a working group affiliated(附属) with the Party's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection, which sent him to Henan Province in central China to help implement(实施) a 1983 campaign(运动) against corruption(贪污). He stayed there for two years, transferring(转让) to economic work. Fang became head of the provincial(省的) agriculture trading company, which among other things shipped half a million pigs each year to Hong Kong, then he helped run the provincial committee(委员会) in charge of international trade and investment. One of Fang's bosses in his last years in Henan was none other than Wu Jichuan, soon to become minister of Posts and Telecommunications.

When China Construction Bank emerged as the Chinese partner in CICC, Wang tapped Fang, whom he'd previously hired to run an investment subsidiary(附属的), to be the joint venture's senior Chinese official. Fang came to feel that he was being treated dismissively(表示轻视的) by Morgan Stanley. That was particularly galling(难堪的), since Fang had helped put CICC together. In the early 1990s he had conceived(怀孕) of starting a Chinese investment bank to speed the SOE reform process. He discussed the idea with Liu Guoguang, a noted economist(经济学者) whose daughter had married Fang's younger brother. Liu introduced him to Edwin Lim, who had established(确定的) the World Bank's office in China and served as its first chief of mission(使命). Fang and Lim set up CICC, with Lim acting as its first CEO until 1996, while he was on leave from the World Bank.

Fang could be headstrong(任性的) and insist on doing things his own way. He spoke English imperfectly(有缺点地) and was green by our standards. But it was a big mistake to underestimate(低估) his talent(才能)―or drive. Fang was a man of action, a genius(天才) at navigating(驾驶) the Chinese system. I've known very few bankers with his ability to get things done―and no one else quite like him in China. A natural storyteller(说故事的人), he could take complex(复杂的) subjects and recast(重铸) them in a simple manner that Chinese bureaucrats(官僚) could understand and act on.

We made sure we treated the endlessly animated(活生生的) Fang like a client, with the respect he deserved. John Thornton took the lead. John was a superb(极好的) strategist(战略家), adept(熟练的) at corporate(法人的) intrigue(阴谋) and client service, which made him a valued adviser in the merger(合并) work where he'd cut his teeth―and in wooing Fang. John at times ruffled(有褶饰边的) feathers inside and outside of Goldman, but he was peerless(无与伦比的) at winning the confidence―and business―of clients. He was brimming(盈满的) with farsighted(有远见的) ideas and suggestions, as befits(适合于) someone who had been the leader in expanding(扩张) Goldman's U.K. and European activities.

John approached Fang in a typically(代表性地) blunt(钝的) way, saying in effect: “You call yourself a banker, but you don't know the first thing about banking. I'm in charge of Asia, but I don't know the first thing about China. I'll teach you banking, you teach me China.” Fang took his straightforwardness(坦率) as a sign of respect.

When Deutsche Telekom made its long-awaited(被期待已久的) IPO on November 18, 1996, we made sure to invite to Frankfurt a Chinese delegation(代表团) that included Fang and Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications officials, whom we treated like VIPs. Goldman chairman Jon Corzine met with them as they witnessed(目击) our launch(发射) of Germany's first mega-privatization. The IPO went off without a hitch(故障), with Deutsche Telekom raising more than $13 billion. We hoped the Chinese would return home with fresh confidence about the potential(潜能) of their own valuable, if tangled(紊乱的), telecom assets(资产). And convinced that Goldman was the best firm for their deal.

The Deutsche Telekom deal made a big impression on the Chinese. Even today Wang Qishan likes to joke that it took eight years for Germany to spin off Deutsche Telekom, but China completed its deal within six months of awarding(颁奖) the banking mandate(授权). Of course, the Germans had some big issues to deal with during those years, such as the fall of the Berlin Wall and unification(统一). But there were similarities(类似) between the two countries. As in China, Germany's postal and telecommunication services were deeply entwined(缠住). Until 1989 Deutsche Telekom had been part of the Bundespost, the German post office, which traced(追溯) its beginnings to the Holy Roman Empire.

In China state ties also ran deep. For a long time, only high-ranking state officials had residential(住宅的) telephone lines. During the Cultural Revolution, the MPT was briefly abolished(废除) and the phone system was run by the military(军队). By 1973 the system was in civilian(民用的) hands but complex and snaggled: a myriad(无数) of local and provincial bureaus(局) reported to a reconstituted(重新设立) MPT as well as to their local governments. After the onset(开始) of reform, Beijing worked with mixed results to separate commercial(商业的) activities from regulatory(管理的) functions and to decentralize(分散) administrative(管理的) power. In the early 1990s, the government created the Directorate General of Telecommunications, better known as China Telecom, to manage the business functions.

Along the way, the government increased investment in the previously neglected(疏忽) sector(部门), adopting(采取) preferential(优先的) tax policies(政策) and giving managers more responsibility(责任) for profits(利润). Nonetheless(尽管如此), by the end of the 1980s, there was still just one telephone line per 200 citizens (up from one per 500 in 1978). China embarked(从事) on a build-out unrivaled(无敌的) anywhere in the world, spending more than $35 billion on infrastructure(基础设施) between 1992 and 1996. The payoff(支付的) was striking. Fixed-line subscribers(订阅) leaped(跳) from 11.5 million to nearly 55 million; mobile subscribers soared(高飞) from 177,000 to 7 million. From the end of 1996 to mid-1997 alone, 2.4 million more mobile subscribers would be added. But China still had a long way to go. In 1996 just 4.5 percent of the population had fixed-line access versus(对) 64 percent in the U.S., while 0.6 percent had cellular(细胞的) access versus 16.3 percent in the States. The country's potential was immense(巨大的), however, and because China had started so late, it had fewer sunk costs in legacy(遗赠) operations and would be able to leapfrog(跃过) antiquated(过时的) technologies.

Still, in the 1990s, newly savvy(悟性) consumers(消耗) complained increasingly about poor service, long waits for lines, and the high fees the MPT charged for installation(安装) and other services to finance its build-out. The government gradually reduced MPT's preferences, and the State Council sanctioned(制裁) the creation(创造) of a competitor, China United Telecommunications Corporation, whose shareholders(股东) included the country's rail and power ministries(部门) (adding prestige(威望), Henry Kissinger would become an honorary(荣誉的) adviser). Though it ran a distant second in size, China Unicom offered mobile services and broke the MPT's monopoly(垄断). Fees charged to consumers declined(下降). By the second half of the 1990s, China's ambitious(野心勃勃的) telecom(电信) build-out required more capital than the system could generate(形成) on its own.

We might have had Wang Qishan and Fang Fenglei as advocates(提倡者) for the China Telecom deal, but we made sure to touch all bases. The team arranged a meeting for me in December 1996 with Wu Jichuan, the powerful head of the MPT. The meeting got off to an inauspicious(不祥的) start when Cherry Li and I got snarled(纠缠不清的) in traffic not far from the ministry. We kept nervously glancing at our watches, knowing that we simply could not be late. That would be taken as a near-unforgivable insult(侮辱). Five minutes to go, and we were still stuck.

“What do you suggest we do?” I asked Cherry.

“I suggest we run.”

So we did, jumping from the taxi and, overcoats flapping(拍动), sprinting(冲刺) down Chang'an Avenue to the amusement of pedestrians. We managed to get to the ministry, a drab(浅褐色) hulk(废船) of a building, on time. The bespectacled(戴眼镜的), 60-year-old Wu was already waiting for us. He had spent nearly all his career(事业) in the industry, graduating from the Beijing Institute of Posts and Telecommunications, then working his way up from technician(技师) to division chief to vice(钳住) minister and, in 1993, to minister. He'd even married into the business: his wife of nearly four decades(十年) was an expert in telecom transmissions(传动装置). A tough and wily(狡猾的) bureaucrat(官僚), Wu had over the years outmaneuvered(以计谋胜过) and crushed(压碎的) competitors who threatened(威胁) his control of the telecom sector(部门).

Our aim was to get Wu's support for Goldman Sachs to host a much-needed symposium(讨论会) on privatization(私有化) for ministry executives(经理). I also wanted to establish(建立) a personal rapport(密切关系) with Wu and to demonstrate(证明) how high a priority(优先) we placed on China Telecom. As chief operating officer of a global investment(投资) bank, I could not oversee the deal day to day, but I could take direct responsibility(责任) for it. This was essential to the Chinese, who may be among the most status- and rank-conscious people on earth. I promised to attend the symposium, which we agreed to hold in January in Sanya on the island province of Hainan, in the South China Sea. Sanya was a tropical(热带的) resort(凭借) with beaches and big hotels popular with honeymooners(度蜜月) and Minister Wu. The MPT, surprisingly, owned a hotel there that we could use.

The conference and our team were organized by Hsueh-ming Wang, who had joined Goldman after several years as a founding partner in an aircraft-leasing firm in Hong Kong. She played a vital(至关重要的) role, developing relationships with Chinese clients and officials, particularly Minister Wu and Wang Qishan. She understood the importance of “face” and worried that we would send the wrong people to Hainan. If we sent junior bankers to talk about finance before a senior minister like Wu, we might lose any chance of a mandate(授权) right then and there. John Thornton made sure that senior Goldman partners attended, and our team worked through Christmas preparing presentations on all aspects(方面) of finance.

In mid-January 1997, two weeks before the scheduled(预定的) date of the conference, I had to withdraw(撤退), creating a minicrisis. We needed someone with comparable(可比较的) status to Minister Wu to attend or he might pull out, too, damaging our prospects(前途). We had just appointed(约定的) John Thornton chairman of Asia, but he was in his early 40s, and it was felt he lacked Wu's stature(身高). Fortunately, 53-year-old Bob Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International, agreed to make the trip. John, who was on our six-member executive committee(委员会), far outranked(地位高于) Hormats internally(内部的), but Bob had been on the U.S. National Security Council staff(职员) when Henry Kissinger had made the opening to China in 1971, and he had been involved(包含) in the discussions that led to normalization(正常化) of relations in 1979. The Chinese, with their abiding(持久的) respect for such long-term connections, were pleased for him to substitute(替代) for me.

Several dozen people gathered for the conference―Goldman bankers, their CICC counterparts(副本), and a raft(筏) of MPT bureaucrats from Beijing and the provinces. Minister Wu kicked off the proceedings(开始), while John led the sessions(会议). The presentations were meant to give officials of the MPT and CICC a primer(初级读本) in taking a telecom company public. As Fang Fenglei had told us, “I don't know much about finance or the rules and regulations of IPOs, and if I don't, you can be sure the MPT doesn't either.”

Our team used the Deutsche Telekom offering as a template(模板) to walk everyone through the IPO process, instructing the Chinese in everything from how to structure(组织) a company and arrange its accounts to writing the prospectus(内容说明书) and conducting a road show. They lapped up the information, despite(尽管) the language challenges, taking copious(丰富的) notes in Chinese fashion. In one particularly unusual moment, the Deutsche Telekom CFO's remarks had to be translated from German to English to Chinese.

The Chinese had ambitious goals. They were keen(敏锐的) to complete the deal by September, a date that coincided(一致) with two high-profile(高调的) events that would draw lots of attention: the World Bank/International Monetary Fund annual(年度的) meeting, which would be held for the first time on Chinese soil, in Hong Kong, and the Chinese Communist Party's National Congress, which meets every five years and ratifies(批准) key Party decisions, including leadership(领导能力) changes. We'd learned, moreover, that the Chinese wanted to raise upward of $2 billion―an eye-popping(使人瞠目的) number for a country that had yet to do a deal bigger than $625 million. It was not a number based on any economic(经济的) analysis; it was just a goal. A firm goal.

The most obvious challenge we faced was that, in conventional(符合习俗的) terms, there was as yet no actual company to underwrite(给…保险). The China Telecom (Hong Kong) holding company was officially unveiled(使公诸于众) in late March, but it was, in the beginning, a shell(壳) with no assets(资产): the entity(实体) whose shares would be sold to the public had yet to be created. We would have to help the MPT fashion a company that would meet listing requirements and appeal(呼吁) to investors(投资者). This was the opposite of a normal underwriting, where you start with an operating company with known assets, measurable(可测量的) revenues(税收) or cash flows, and audited(受审查的) books, and work with management to prepare it for public markets. We simply had to create new models as we went along.

John and Mike Evans explained to Minister Wu that for a $2 billion deal to succeed the ministry would have to meet a number of conditions. Although the government wanted to keep tight control, it would need to float a substantial(大量的) enough chunk(大块) of China Telecom (Hong Kong)―between 20 and 25 percent―to satisfy listing requirements in Hong Kong and to generate the capital it wanted to raise. The company would have to include its highest-quality assets to demonstrate future growth―after all, investors would be buying the huge potential(潜能) of China's telecom market. It would need a strong management team willing to go on a two-week road show to sell the deal, and it would need to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, as well as in Hong Kong, to assure(保证) investors that it met the exacting accounting and financial(金融的) standards of the United States. The government would also need to set up a transparent(透明的) regulatory(管理的) framework(框架) that made telecom tariffs(关税表) clear, allowing investors to assess(评定) growth prospects. Minister Wu agreed, and the five conditions were written down. Mike(扩音器) signed the document. It wasn't a contract(合同), but we were on the hook and would have to deliver.

From a practical point of view, the government couldn't just sell a small piece of China Telecom itself. It was too big, too complex(复杂的), and its business was too concentrated(集中) in landlines, which did not much interest investors. The solution(解决方案) was to focus China Telecom (Hong Kong) on the mobile business and seed it with the cellular(细胞的) assets of various Chinese provinces. The ministry would have to help us identify(确定) which provinces met the requirements for revenues, growth potential, and a compelling(引人注目的) story: millions, not thousands, of customers; commercial(商业广告), not rural(农村的), subscribers(订阅) (for higher revenue per customer); and high profit(利润) margins(边缘). Then the deal team had to sort through the administrative(管理的) and political tangle(纠纷) and tease(取笑) out the mobile from the fixed-line assets, which in most provinces were intermingled(混合).

Figuring all of this out wasn't easy. Ministry accounts at all levels were, at best, opaque(不透明的), and it wasn't long before there were upward of 350 full-time accountants(会计师) from accounting firm KPMG digging through the books as they did due diligence(勤奋). All day and into the night, they grilled the MPT officials, trying to reconcile(一致) the numbers, until finally some of those officials begged our people for just one day off.

Meantime(其时), a number of provinces, which exercised control over their local telecom businesses, resisted participating(参与). Why would they want to surrender(投降) their most promising operations―and the money these made―to a public company that would be controlled by the MPT in Beijing? Indeed, as they figured out the value that could be unleashed(发动) from the mobile assets, they wanted to do their own deals and not be included in the China Telecom (Hong Kong) structure. The ministry used its clout(给…打补钉) to quash(撤销) that resistance(阻力). In this case, reform(改革) efforts led initially to more central control, not less.

The ministry came up with three provinces as candidates(候选人) for inclusion(包含) in the deal: Guangdong, Zhejiang, and Jiangsu. All were booming(兴旺的) coastal(沿海的) areas with rapid growth potential. It was decided to start with Zhejiang and Guangdong, which had the largest number of mobile subscribers. Together they accounted for just under 30 percent of all the mobile subscriptions(捐献) in the country; their revenues and growth prospects would justify(替…辩护) a market valuation(评价) that could get the company a market capitalization(资本化) of $8 billion. Floating 25 percent of the shares would raise the $2 billion the government was looking for.

It was crucial(重要的) to the deal that China Telecom (Hong Kong) wasn't just promising investors the markets of Guangdong and Zhejiang; it was promising investors China's mobile telephone future. The mobile assets of Jiangsu―and other provinces―could be acquired(获得) later. Thus, from the beginning, it was assumed(假定的) that the company would essentially roll up the provincial(省的) mobile networks to create a massive(大量的) national operating system. This would remove a roadblock(路障) to economic development and give China Telecom (Hong Kong) two attractive sources of growth: the organic(有机的) growth from rising demand in the provinces that it would control at the outset(开始), plus growth from the cellular assets of other provinces that it would systematically(有系统地) acquire. We could tell investors: “Think of this almost like an open-ended fund. Every year or so, we're going to add more provinces.”

Initially, I had my reservations about this audacious(无畏的) plan, which was a bet on China's future. What if China didn't continue with asset injections from the other provinces? Investors would have bought into a hollow(空的) promise. But I realized that the Chinese had no choice but to follow through. They wanted foreign know-how(诀窍), they wanted capital, and they wanted other state-owned enterprises to be able to come to market as well. China Telecom (Hong Kong) would be the lens(镜头) through which the world would view China and decide whether its big companies could become competitive(竞争的), well managed, profitable(有利可图的), and thus worth investing(熔模铸造) in. The Chinese would do what it took to make this deal a success.

On May 20, 1997, the MPT awarded(授予) Goldman and CICC the official mandate for the role we wanted as the deal's joint(关节) global coordinators(协调者), which meant we would take primary responsibility for helping China Telecom (Hong Kong) prepare to be a public company and for coordinating(调整) the marketing and pricing of its shares. MPT finance director Shi Cuiming, who would become chairman and CEO of China Telecom, drew up the document by hand in Minister Wu's office and signed it, along with China Telecom president Chen Zhaobin. John Thornton signed for Goldman while Fang did the honors for CICC. Not long afterward, the ministry named J.P. Morgan and Bear Stearns as its financial advisers, a limited role that essentially involved providing independent advice to the company, particularly when the IPO was priced.

At the time, our Beijing offices consisted of a couple of rooms in a building next door to the Great Wall Sheraton Hotel, and once we had the mandate(授权), they began to get crowded. We soon employed 16 full-time people on our team, which worked around the clock to prepare the offering. We put people on the ground in Beijing, Hangzhou, Guangzhou, and Hong Kong, and every Tuesday they reported to Shi at the MPT. The world would be watching this deal, and we were determined that there would be no screwups(弄糟事情的人).

In June, China Telecom (Hong Kong) announced that it would buy 5.5 percent of Hong Kong Telecom, the territory's primary provider of service, for $1.2 billion from its controlling shareholder(股东), Cable & Wireless, the British concern(关系) that had been among the first of the U.K. state-owned companies privatized(私有化) by the Margaret Thatcher government in the 1980s. Wang Qishan and Minister Wu had been pushing for China Telecom to purchase(购买) a stake(桩) for two years after hearing that British Telecommunications might bid for Cable & Wireless. That offer never materialized(具体化), but Wu had kept raising the idea of a Chinese bid for control: he did not want Hong Kong's phone services to stay in British hands after the Handover. It was decided, however, to keep Hong Kong Telecom separate from the China Telecom (Hong Kong) listing. The market was interested in “red chips”―mainland companies listed in Hong Kong; we didn't want to muddy(污浊) China Telecom's story with Hong Kong assets(资产).

Fang Fenglei had an iron constitution(宪法) and an insatiable(贪得无厌的) desire to learn. During the intense(强烈的) months leading up to the IPO, Fang would show up at all hours at the Great Wall Sheraton, Hsueh-ming Wang in tow, to pick Mike Evans's brain. He would park himself in the lobby(大厅), order a scotch, and talk with Mike and Hsueh-ming for hours about every aspect(方面) of the deal. One night it might be investment(投资) banking fees, another the details of book building. Fang was determined to learn the business. And he was learning from the preeminent(卓越的) capital markets banker in the world.

If anyone had the stamina(毅力) to outlast Fang it was Mike. Confident and competitive(竞争的), Mike and his twin brother, Mark, had won gold medals rowing on the Canadian men's eights team in the 1984 Los Angeles Summer Olympic Games. Mark had overseen(视察) Asian operations from Hong Kong for us beginning in 1994 and moved in 1997 to New York to run global equity(公平) capital markets. Mike(扩音器) had come to Goldman from Salomon Brothers in 1993; by 1996 he was head of European equity capital markets. Having brought Deutsche Telekom to market, Mike was the logical(合逻辑的) choice to oversee China Telecom's IPO. Tall, lean(倾斜), and aggressive, he had the oarsman's disregard(忽视) for limitations(限制). He combined superb(极好的) financial(金融的) engineering with incisive(深刻的) strategic(战略上的) thinking; he rolled up his sleeves and immersed(沉浸) himself in every detail of a transaction(交易), connecting as easily with a CEO or head of state as with the most junior analyst(分析者).

In late June I went to Hong Kong for the Handover. The British were formally(正式地) giving the colony(殖民地) back to the Chinese after 156 years, ushering(引导) in a new era for both China and Hong Kong, and there were festivities(欢庆) for days. Goldman hosted a big dinner to mark the occasion(时机).

During the celebrations I bumped(凸起的) into an old friend, Phil Purcell, who had just become CEO of Morgan Stanley following its merger(合并) with Dean Witter, Discover & Company. I knew Phil from Chicago, where he had led corporate(法人的) strategy(战略) for Sears Roebuck and was a client of mine. Now there he was in Hong Kong with Morgan Stanley Asia head Jack Wadsworth. I had a high regard for Phil, but I couldn't resist bragging(吹牛) a little bit about our China Telecom mandate.

Finally, Phil turned to Jack Wadsworth, right in front of me, and said, “Explain to me again how our joint(共同的) venture(企业) partner brings this business to Goldman Sachs.”

Jack, a first-rate banker and professional, was speechless(说不出话的).

I had always cautioned(警告) our folks not to take victory laps or to rub people's noses in our successes. But I couldn't resist ribbing(戏弄) Phil. He was a friend, and this was one of the most extraordinary turn of events I had seen in my investment banking career(事业).

My gloating(沾沾自喜的) was short-lived(短暂的). On July 1 Hong Kong was returned to China. On July 2 all hell(地狱) broke loose in the markets. After months of battling speculators(投机者), Thailand(泰国) gave up defending its currency. The baht(铢) plunged(投入) nearly 20 percent against the dollar that day, triggering(引发) the onset(开始) of the Asian financial crisis(危机) that would batter(猛击) many of the high-flying economies(经济) of the region for months.

Thailand was the first country affected, but the pain would soon spread, reversing(颠倒) the successes of the previous decade(十年). In general, these economies had overheated(过热), fueled by hot money, too-easy credit, property speculation(投机), and the inevitable(必然的) sins of crony(密友) capitalism(资本主义): corruption(贪污) and insider dealings. When the bubble(气泡) burst, capital took flight and bank lending dried up. The countries were also mainly export-driven, which left them vulnerable(易受攻击的) to currency fluctuations(起伏). A strengthening dollar, to which some had pegged(限制) their currencies, led to a dramatic(戏剧的) reduction(减少) in demand for their exports(出口商品), which were now more expensive. A weak Japanese economy further softened the market for Southeast Asian exports.

Signs of trouble had emerged(浮现) in 1996 but at first appeared localized(地方化). Speculation against the baht peaked(竖起) in May 1997 with a massive(大量的) attack on the currency. Thailand spent billions in defense, but by July the government could no longer afford the fight and let the baht float. Within days the Philippines devalued(贬值) its peso(比索) and the currencies of Malaysia and Indonesia came under attack. Money fled the region and the contagion(传染病) spread. Regional(地区的) stock markets were hit hard, currencies swooned(昏晕), liquidity(流动性) dried up, banks failed, and sovereign(至高无上的) debts were downgraded(降级). The IMF would eventually(最后) put together a $40 billion fund to prop(支撑) up the currencies of Thailand, Indonesia, and South Korea.

It wasn't the best time to be planning the biggest-ever Chinese IPO.

To be sure, this would all take place over several months, and in the earliest days of the crisis, Hong Kong markets held up. The Hang Seng stock index had risen more than 30 percent in 1996 and continued its climb into January 1997 before retreating(撤退). It recovered in April and climbed steadily, perhaps inspired by the impending(即将发生的) Handover. Though the index dropped more than 3.2 percent in that fateful(重大的) week after the baht collapsed(倒塌), it regained(恢复) its momentum(势头) to reach a new record of 16,673 on August 7.

The volatility(挥发性) was unsettling(使人不安的), and I couldn't help remembering our early days in Asia, when some at Goldman had favored Southeast Asia over China, figuring it was a safer bet. In the midst(当中) of this crisis, we took a hard look at our Asian efforts. Led by John Thornton, we scrutinized(详细检查的) operations, business by business, and decided to focus on pursuing(继续) a smaller number of the highest-profile deals and relationships while fielding fewer, higher-quality bankers. The idea was to pursue clients like China Telecom and avoid getting scattered(分散的) chasing(雕镂术) lots of less consequential(间接的) deals. Once you branded yourself with marquee(选取框) deals, other transactions would follow. That was the Goldman strategy worldwide, but in Asia we'd gotten(得到) a bit unfocused.

The IPO had originally been planned for mid-September, but even before the onset of the crisis that target had been a tall order. As the Goldman and CICC team examined China Telecom, we pressed the MPT to provide what investors(投资者) would demand from a company trying to raise so much money in this closely followed sector(部门). The very process of preparing the IPO―challenging assumptions(假定), forcing questions to be answered, reconciling(一致) accounts, nailing down business plans, examining the quality of management, and focusing on the bottom line of profit(利润) and loss―helped steer(控制) the ministry(部门) to make critical(鉴定的) changes in how it operated the company and how it organized the industry. Our focus extended(延伸) to the administrative(管理的) and regulatory(管理的) arena(舞台) as well. How would fixed-line assets be handled in the future? What would the national government's role be, and how would the provinces fit in? How would mobile be regulated(调节)?

Zhu Rongji's approach(方法) to these issues embodied(体现) his genius(天才) as a reformer(改革家). He was using the market to instigate(唆使) changes that ministry and management could not or would not do on their own. As I've said, he was not an ideologue(思想家) but a fierce pragmatist(实用主义者), a socialist willing to use market mechanisms(机制) to speed reforms needed to enhance(提高) the efficiency(效率) of the country's enterprises and improve the nation's well-being(幸福).

“Management,” he told me with typical(典型的) bluntness(钝) in a meeting later that year, “is backward and needs to become more modern and progressive(进步的).”

But he felt he could go only so far. State-owned enterprises needed foreign capital, but the Chinese could not surrender(投降) control―for a simple reason. SOEs lost money in part because they had too many workers; if foreigners took control, they would lay off many employees(雇员)―he estimated(估计的) up to 80 percent. Doing that without an adequate(充足的) social security system would threaten(威胁) stability(稳定性). China would have to build a safety net and in the meantime(其时) use the equity markets for its version of partial(局部的) privatization(私有化).

Meantime, our team raced against the odds(几率) to prepare the IPO, which had been pushed back to October 23, 1997.

Mike(扩音器) Evans and his counterparts(副本) at CICC devised(设计) a plan to sell the shares in three main tranches(部分): U.S., Asia, and international (primarily Europe). The Asian leg would include a Hong Kong retail(零售的) offering, an institutional(制度的) offering, and an allocation(分配) to key corporate(法人的) investors(投资者), whose presence(存在) in the deal we judged would help anchor(抛锚) the offering and inspire confidence in the market. A dozen Hong Kong business magnates(巨头) and the Hong Kong arms of mainland entities(实体) like China International Trust and Investment Corporation (CITIC) agreed to buy at the offering price and retain(保持) their stakes(桩) for at least a year. Collectively(集体的), they would account for nearly half of the initial offering of shares, and 10 percent of the company. This concept(观念) of cornerstone(基础) investors hadn't been tried before; we created it for China Telecom, and we would use it on many successful future IPOs.

But some of these investors got nervous as the expected size of the deal increased and the market got precarious(危险的). At our suggestion, Minister Wu called them to an emergency meeting in Shenzhen. Mike Evans updated the group, letting them know there was strong demand for China Telecom shares, both on the retail front―where the deal would be oversubscribed(订购过多) 30 times―and among global institutions. But some of the corporate investors were in a sour(酸的) mood(情绪). They worried the deal might tank while they were locked into holding shares at the IPO price.

It was up to Minister Wu to reassure(安心) them, and he did just that, with a short, stirring(激动人心的) speech in which he argued that whatever the state of the markets was right then, the long-term benefits(利益) of investing(熔模铸造) in China Telecom (Hong Kong) would more than reward them. The corporate investors hung in after Minister Wu assured(保证) them, “This is just the appetizer(开胃物). The main course is to come.”

On September 29 we gave investors a first look at China Telecom's price range: 2.6 billion shares from HK$7.75 to HK$10.00. Then Mike and the CICC team led a caravan(大篷车) on a whirlwind(旋风般的) two-week road show to about a dozen cities in the U.S., Europe, and Asia. The first U.S. stop was New York on October 8. I hosted a luncheon(午宴) presentation at the Plaza Hotel. Prospective(未来的) investors in the audience relied(依靠) on earpieces(耳机) that simultaneously(同时地) translated the Mandarin presentation. With demand clearly building, we did a rare thing―we repriced the offering in the middle of the road show, raising the range to between HK$9.39 and HK$12.48.

Heading into the meeting to price the deal, Mike felt the offering price should be in the middle of the range, but China Construction Bank chief Wang Qishan wanted to issue the shares at a higher level, one that would drive speculators(投机者) away. He and other officials also favored a price that included the number 88, which many Chinese consider doubly lucky. They were set on HK$11.88 per share. Mike worried that the weak markets were going to give way. Wang Qishan was supremely(至上地) confident but compromised(妥协) a little.

“We're just going to go with HK$11.80,” he calmly told Mike.

“I'm not being asked,” Mike remembers thinking. “I'm being told.”

In Hong Kong shares are priced one week before they are listed and begin trading. That's in contrast(对比) to the U.S., where IPOs are priced at the day's close and trade the next day. We announced the price on October 16, one week before the IPO trading date of October 23.

Mike had his finger on the pulse of the market, and his apprehensions(理解) turned out to be justified(证明合法). The financial(金融的) crisis(危机), which had begun in earnest(认真) in July, turned its fury(狂怒) for the first time on Hong Kong. On October 17, the day after we priced the IPO, Taiwan stopped defending its currency. Speculators attacked Hong Kong, the last regional(地区的) currency pegged(限制) to the U.S. dollar. The new Hong Kong SAR government vowed(发誓) to defend the currency and ratcheted(安装棘轮于) up short-term interest rates, which alarmed Hong Kong's all-important property markets. By October 22, the day before the China Telecom shares would open for trading, Hong Kong stocks had fallen 14 percent. We were setting sail into a raging headwind(逆风).

Thursday, October 23, turned out to be a very wet day in Hong Kong, with dark skies pouring rain. To Canadian Mike Evans, the weather boded(预示) ill. Walking over to the Hong Kong Stock Exchange with Shi Cuiming that morning, he said, “Can you believe how hard it's raining?”

“This is a good sign,” Shi corrected Mike. “It's a good omen(预兆).”

With Hong Kong's currency under attack, the Hang Seng index dropped like a rock; it would fall more than 10 percent that day, which was quickly dubbed(配音) Black Thursday. China Telecom opened down sharply at HK$10.50 and stumbled(踌躇) through the day, before ending the first day of trading at HK$10.55.

China Telecom had raised $4.22 billion, but we were all nervous about what would happen next, as Hong Kong shares continued to be pounded. China Telecom shares climbed above their offering price on Friday (HK$12.15) and held on to some gains Monday (HK$11.95), even as markets cracked(破裂) wide open. The Hang Seng dropped 6 percent on Monday, triggering(引发) a mini-crash in New York, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average falling 7.2 percent; trading had to be halted(停止) twice before the market was closed early. Tuesday was worse: the Hang Seng plunged(投入) 14 percent, and China Telecom was back to its first-day close of HK$10.55.

The Chinese were worried, too. Wang Qishan later told me that in the midst(当中) of the frenzy(狂暴), his boss, Vice Premier Zhu Rongji, called him back to Beijing from Hong Kong. Before he went in to see Zhu, he phoned to check on China Telecom and heard that the stock had bounced(弹跳) back.

“Did you get the $4.2 billion?” Zhu asked him.

“Yes,” Wang said. “Zhen jin bai yin―real gold and silver.”

That, I learned, was a Chinese expression that means, in effect, “real money.”

“I'll only be reassured when it's in your pocket,” Zhu said. “Only then can you be really sure that it's there.”

It may be hard to believe today, but back then China was worried about money.

Fortunately, the demand for China Telecom was strong and persisted(存留) through the fall. By year-end, its shares were trading up 26 percent from its first-day close and 13 percent above its offer price. The Hang Seng index was up 3 percent.

Afterward, Mike told me that during pricing, when Wang Qishan kept reassuring(安心) him that demand would be there, he had thought, “These guys(球员) know nothing about pricing deals.”

Later he said he had changed his mind, concluding: “Maybe I don't know anything about pricing Chinese deals.”

Fang Fenglei had another take on things, turning to Chinese superstition(迷信). China Telecom's listing code number on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange was 941. These numbers, as pronounced in Chinese, mean “survival(幸存) in the midst(当中) of dangers.”

Not quite a month later, my wife, Wendy, and I flew to Beijing for the China Environment Forum, where I would be giving a speech on behalf(代表) of the Nature Conservancy on the economics(经济学) of conservation, a passion of mine.

On November 21 I met with Zhu Rongji at the Purple Light Pavilion at Zhongnanhai. Our group included John Thornton, Mike Evans, and Wendy. She has a sharp eye for detail, and I could see her making mental notes of the rich blue carpet and splendid floral(花的) arrangements, and of the elegantly(优美地) dressed young women who, with military(军事的) precision(精度), strode(大步走) into the room to serve us tea. As we had in February, Zhu and I sat facing each other across a side table, accompanied(陪伴) by interpreters(说明). It was almost nine months to the day Zhu had given us his implicit(含蓄的) backing for the China Telecom(电信) assignment(分配). As ever, the Chinese had been slow to decide, astonishingly quick to act.

Zhu asked me, “Are you confident about the performance of China Telecom?”

“It's been the best-performing stock in Asia, despite(尽管) the crisis(危机),” I pointed out. “And those people who didn't subscribe(订阅) to the IPO will regret that for the rest of their lives.”

Zhu quoted a Chinese proverb(谚语) about “the one beautiful flower in the garden.” He was referring to China Telecom, the symbol(象征) of Chinese stability(稳定性) in the middle of the Asian financial(金融的) crisis.

“Goldman Sachs did a great job,” he told me. Then he pointed to Mike Evans, sitting along the rim of the horseshoe(装蹄铁于).

“How many people like Mike Evans do you have in Goldman Sachs?”

“Only one,” I said. “He's the best in the world at what he does.”

“Mr. Evans,” Zhu said, “if I had ten people like you, I'd turn around all of the state-owned enterprises. If I had 100 people like you, I'd turn around our whole country.”

The China Telecom deal had given Zhu Rongji a start on that goal. The first high-profile(高调的) example of state-owned enterprise reform(改革), it was a true landmark(陆标). Its success signaled the international markets' approval(批准) of the country's economic(经济的) direction and confirmed(确认) Zhu's supposition(假定) that Western capital markets could begin to do for China's industrial(工业的) base what bureaucrats(官僚) who lacked the resolve(坚决) or skill or fresh perspective(观点) could not.

The deal also marked the beginning of a widespread corporate(法人的) restructuring(调整) of the telecom system that would create a nationwide mobile system and lead to a more competitive(竞争的) domestic(国内的) marketplace through a series of complex(复杂的) corporate reshufflings. Not long after the offering, the government would restructure MPT, combining it with elements(基础) of other ministries(部门) to create the Ministry of Information Industry under the redoubtable(可怕的) Minister Wu. China Telecom (Hong Kong) eventually(最后) became China Mobile; what it left behind would retain(保持) the China Telecom brand, consolidate(巩固) the country's landline businesses, and eventually expand(扩张) into mobile. Another start-up challenger, China Netcom, would appear in 1999, take over China Telecom's northern China landline business, and in 2008 merge(合并) into China Unicom. All this would leave China with three massive(大量的) and competitive national carriers.


CHAPTER FIVE

Your Chairman Has Gone to Sleep

Zhou Yongkang, the head of the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), was eager to meet former U.S. president George H. W. Bush. It was early 1998, and we had learned that Zhou was planning to attend an energy industry conference in Houston, Texas, the president's hometown. CNPC, the biggest and most important energy concern(关系) in China, was expected to be the next big state-owned enterprise to go public, and I was eager to get to know Zhou and his colleagues better. I'd met him for the first time the previous November in Beijing over lunch near CNPC's headquarters(设立总部). Zhou was a career(事业) oilman, educated at the Beijing Petroleum Institute, who had gone to the frozen fields of Northeast China after completing his studies. Unlike many government bureaucrats(官僚) of that era, who still sported white socks with their dark business suits, Zhou was nattily(整洁的) dressed and meticulously(细致地) groomed(整饰). A sharp, serious man, he had taken charge of CNPC the year before, knew his business cold, and had clear ambitions(野心) for how to transform(改变) his company.

We invited Zhou and his colleagues to visit us in the States and arranged a meeting with the former president through his cousin George Herbert Walker IV, who worked in Goldman's asset(资产) management division. On February 12 John Thornton, Mike Evans, and I flew down to Houston. We met Zhou at the former president's office. President Bush's son Neil greeted us and then took us to see the president. Zhou beamed(有梁的), calling Bush an old friend of China. The president had founded Zapata, an oil driller, in the 1950s, and served as the head of the U.S. Liaison Office in Beijing in 1974C1975 before normalization(正常化) of relations.

“I've been an oilman all my life,” Zhou told President Bush, “and you can always trust an oilman.”

Bush was in fine form, expansive(广阔的) and familiar. He explained the memorabilia(大事记) on the walls and proudly described his presidential(总统的) library, which had opened in November in nearby College Station. The president invited us into his inner office, and we chatted for a while about world affairs, the outlook for oil prices, and the character of oilmen generally. He reminisced(追忆说) fondly about his days in Beijing and how much China had changed for the better. He took out a sheet of paper from his desk and wrote a note that he asked Zhou to deliver to Chinese Premier Li Peng.

I can only surmise(猜测) why Zhou wanted to meet with President Bush. I've found that many Chinese like to meet prominent(突出的) Americans when they visit the States, out of a combination(结合) of curiosity(好奇) and an inherent(内在的) preoccupation(全神贯注) with rank―such visits confer(授予) status on them back home. In any case, the point wasn't to have a substantive(有实质的) discussion. As I had learned in dealing with China, the meeting itself was the substance(物质). It would help us forge(伪造) a relationship with Zhou, who would perhaps gain a little more cachet(优良标志) at home. I don't know what President Bush wrote to Li Peng, but it didn't escape my attention how he had used Zhou to deliver the note. Years later I, too, would turn to Zhou to deliver an important message to a different Chinese leader. By then, in one of those twists(扭曲) and turns that careers can take, he had become minister of Public Security and I was U.S. Treasury secretary.

We flew back to New York at noon, and the next morning, bright and early, we took Zhou and his colleagues through a series of presentations that we had designed to demonstrate(证明) the depth of our industry expertise(专门知识) as well as our capital markets skills. We showed Zhou our equity(公平) trading floor; experts from banking and research presented our views on the oil and gas business and explained the nuts and bolts of raising capital. After lunch, the group headed up the street to the New York Stock Exchange, where Zhou was delighted to see his name and that of CNPC whiz(飕飕声) by in a welcoming message on the ticker.

We had more on the agenda(议程), but the group was running late and Zhou Yongkang was scheduled(安排) to visit Morgan Stanley. This was a delicate(微妙的) matter and not something we were eager to help out with. After the success of the China Telecom offering, Fang Fenglei was eager to work with us again, a guaranteed(有保证的) way to enrage(激怒) our archrivals. Having lost out on China Telecom, Morgan Stanley was working hard to repair its relationship with China Construction Bank and win the CNPC mandate(授权). CCB chief Wang Qishan, who had brought his boss “real gold and silver” on the China Telecom IPO, had been tapped to become vice(副的) governor(主管人员) of Guangdong, the biggest and most economically(经济地) important province. The new head of the bank would be Zhou Xiaochuan, another protégé of Zhu Rongji's.

With Zhou Xiaochuan's appointment, I truly appreciated Zhu's deft(灵巧的) touch. A brilliant(灿烂的) economist(经济学者), he would use China Construction Bank as the model to begin the crucial(重要的) restructuring(调整) of the ailing(生病的) banking sector(部门). State-owned enterprise reforms(改革) were driven by share offerings, and CICC would be involved(包含) in every one. If the public markets were to be the fulcrum(支点) of change, Zhou Xiaochuan would help Zhu Rongji lean(倾斜) on the lever(杠杆).

We heard later that Morgan Stanley was unhappy about the limited time their executives(经理) had secured(保护) with the CNPC team. Zhou Yongkang had a packed schedule when he was in New York―although he did take a break to enjoy a night on the town. His party ate dinner at famed(闻名) steakhouse(牛排餐厅) Smith & Wollensky then went en masse(挫杆) to see the new movie Titanic. Goldman would secure the CNPC deal, while Morgan Stanley would be awarded(授予) the mandate for the IPO of the oil giant's main rival(对手), Sinopec.

Oil occupied(占据) a special place in China's psyche. More than just a crucial source of energy, it had become over the years a symbol(象征) of independence and self-reliance(自力更生), a literal(文字的) wellspring(泉源) of national pride. Not long after Mao Zedong took power in 1949, he had turned to the Soviet Union to help break China's dependence(依赖) on imports. Until then oil exploration(探测) in China had largely been a disappointment. Mao's Cold War ally dispatched(派遣) thousands of experts, along with equipment, technology, and financial(金融的) support. Drilling began in 1958, and oil was discovered the following year at a field in Northeast China known as Daqing, or Great Celebration. But amid(在其中) ideological(思想的) differences and growing acrimony(辛辣), Russia withdrew(收回) nearly all of its technical advisers in 1960. Two years later the countries severed(割断) relations.

China was determined to develop its energy resources on its own, substituting(替代) sheer(完全) resolve(坚决) for a lack of technical expertise. The government approached(接近) the challenge like a military(军事的) campaign(运动), sending waves of workers to the oil fields. One team, led by Wang Jinxi, labored famously through temperatures as low as ?30°C before finally striking oil. Mao lauded(赞美) the achievements(成就) of “Iron Man” Wang and his Number 1205 drilling team, exhorting(忠告) the country to embrace(拥抱) “the Daqing spirit.” Wang was celebrated as a model worker and national hero and was even elected to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China in 1968. He died two years later at age 47.

Daqing, where Zhou Yongkang went to work in 1967, would become one of the most productive(能生产的) fields ever discovered. In the 1960s and 1970s, it accounted on average for some three-quarters of China's oil output(输出) and at its peak(最高的) produced more than 1 million barrels(桶) per day. As China drove toward its goal of energy independence, other fields were developed, and by the late 1970s, the country had become the world's ninth-largest producer and a net exporter(出口商) of oil, particularly to neighboring Japan. The timing was fortuitous(偶然的), as crude(粗糙的) prices soared(高飞) during the decade's oil shocks. Deng Xiaoping and China's other leaders came to believe that they might be able to pay for modernization(现代化) initiatives(主动权) with surging(激增) oil revenues(税收).

Instead, the explosive(爆炸的) growth sparked(发动) by Deng's reforms placed ever-greater demands on the country's energy resources―from newly sprung(蹦跳) factories to consumers(消耗) switching(转换) on their first refrigerators―and by the late 1980s it was becoming apparent(显然的) that China would need to import oil again. Even as demand boomed(兴旺), reserves had plateaued(座落于高丘上的), in part because of the below-market prices for domestic(国内的) oil sales mandated by the government. While a boon(恩惠) to energy-guzzling state-owned enterprises, this pricing scheme(计划) left little in the till to fund exploration and production. By 1994 China was once again a net importer of oil.

This time China's leaders could not rely(依靠) on a revival(复兴) of the Daqing spirit to provide energy to a country that was much more closely integrated(综合的) into the world economy(经济). Instead they would need to diversify(多样化) their sources of supply, developing other types of energy and venturing(敢于) overseas(在海外) for additional(附加的) oil and gas production. Doing so required capital and carried wide-ranging economic(经济的), political, and national security implications(含义). If China were to turn again to imported oil, it would need its supplies to be safe from interdiction(禁止). Moreover, the state-controlled energy industry would have to become better run and more globally competitive(竞争的) to find, secure, and manage needed resources.

From the onset(开始) of reform(改革) in 1978, China's leaders had sought(寻找) to retool(重组) the sector(部门) into more efficient(有效率的) and logically(逻辑上) structured(有结构的) entities(实体). In 1982 the government created the China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) to develop offshore gas and oil fields in waters deeper than five meters through joint(共同的) ventures(企业) with foreign companies. A year later the refining(精炼) and petrochemical(石油化学产品) sections of the Ministry(部门) of Petroleum(石油) Industry were carved out and combined with chemical and fiber manufacturing enterprises that had previously come under the Chemical Industry and Textile Industry Ministries to form the China Petrochemical Corporation, or Sinopec. This company would be responsible(负责的) for petroleum refining and the production and marketing of petrochemical products. CNPC was formed in 1988 to undertake(承担) onshore(陆上的) oil and gas exploration(探测) and production as well as some refining and chemical production. CNPC controlled major pipelines(管道) and all onshore oil fields plus offshore oil fields in waters up to five meters deep. It owned Daqing, which remained China's largest oil field.

Still, as the 1990s drew to a close, Chinese oil and gas companies badly lagged(落后于) their Western competitors, weighed down by high operational(操作的) costs, low productivity(生产力), overstaffing(人浮于事), and out-of-date equipment. Among other measures, CNPC suffered from higher-than-average production costs.

We could see that the restructuring(调整) and IPO of CNPC would be even more politically difficult and organizationally(组织的) complex(复合体) than that of China Telecom. With China Telecom we had helped the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications pluck(摘) out its most attractive assets(资产)―the mobile telephone services of the major provinces―to create a company that would interest the market. CNPC was another matter. The macroeconomic(宏观经济的) picture was dim. The Asian financial(金融的) crisis(危机) had sapped(受冰川作用侵蚀的) demand, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries cartel(卡特尔) was in disarray(无秩序), and oil prices had dropped to levels not seen since before 1973. On top of that, the changes required at the company itself were daunting(使人畏缩的).

We were nevertheless(然而) eager to push forward, and Mike Evans suggested to Zhou Yongkang that we hold a “summit(顶点)” with a wider group of CNPC executives(经理) and Goldman experts modeled on the presentations we had done on Hainan Island for China Telecom. Zhou appeared eager to do so.

After his New York visit, Zhou Yongkang had traveled to Moscow for meetings. The head of our China team, Ziwang Xu, went along. “Z,” as we called him, was an energetic and resourceful(资源丰富的) banker, with master's degrees from Shanghai's Fudan University (economics(经济学)) and from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University (international business relations), whom we had recruited(招聘) the year before from Morgan Stanley. In Moscow Z had a conversation with Zhou that gave him a better understanding of some of the barriers(障碍物) to pushing the deal forward.

One obstacle(障碍) was that Zhu Rongji, who was set to become premier(总理) in March 1998, had reservations about an IPO, reflecting(反映) internal(内部的) government debates about the energy industry. Zhu was said to have a low opinion of the competence(能力) and prospects(前途) of CNPC and its sister companies and frowned(皱眉) on CNPC's acquiring(获得) overseas(海外的) assets. Zhou Yongkang favored the international strategy(战略), as did outgoing(外出的) premier Li Peng, who exerted(外露的) a strong influence over the energy and power sectors. It was also thought that Zhu held the view that oil prices, at $13 per barrel(桶), might sink further. He was not alone. The Economist would run a piece the following year predicting(预报) that oil prices would fall to $5 per barrel. We had also picked up talk that some Chinese decision makers were pushing to merge(合并) Sinopec and CNPC before any deal.

When Zhu became premier, the whip(鞭子) hand driving reform cracked(破裂的) sharper than ever. He gave state-owned enterprises three years to become profitable(有利可图的) by cutting workers and upgrading technology or be restructured out of existence. Government bloat(膨胀) was also a target. Zhu proposed(建议) cutting China's army of 8 million bureaucrats(官僚) in half and paring(消减) the number of ministries from 40 to 29. The responsibilities(责任) of most industrial(工业的) ministries would be reduced, their regulatory(管理的) functions handed over to the State Economic(经济的) and Trade Commission, and their commercial(商业的) assets spun(纺成的) out into separate state-owned enterprises. Three new ministries were created, including one for labor and social welfare(福利) to deal with layoffs(裁员) that would result from downsizing. Zhu's aim was to move government out of business, making state-owned enterprises more commercial by separating regulators(调整者) from operators.

Zhu Rongji's changes had an immediate impact(影响) on the energy sector. The State Council decided to leave CNPC and Sinopec as separate companies that would be restructured through asset swaps(交换) to create vertically(垂直地) integrated(完整) nationwide oil and gas companies. Previously, CNPC had been focused on “upstream(上游部门)” exploration and production, while Sinopec had concentrated(集中) on the “downstream(下游的)” business of refining and sales. CNPC would transfer(转让) several oil fields to Sinopec and receive a number of refineries(精炼厂), petrochemical plants, and retail(零售的) distribution(分布) companies in return. CNPC's exploration and production assets would now be concentrated in the north, northeast, and northwest, while those of Sinopec would mostly be in the south and east. With a few simple pen strokes(中风), the government had created China's own versions of Exxon, Royal Dutch Shell, and BP. The moves came at a crucial(重要的) moment in the global oil business: low crude(粗糙的) prices and increased competition would soon lead to a wave of mergers creating the so-called super major companies. BP would merge with Amoco in 1998, the same year Exxon and Mobil would announce their impending(即将发生的) combination(结合).

The Chinese government made another crucial change. Until that spring the price of nearly all oil-related products had been set by the state at a discount to market rates, which effectively(有效地) subsidized(补贴的) consumers(消耗) but limited profits(利润) for CNPC. Now the prices of domestic(国内的) crude oil and refined products would be pegged(限制) to international markets.

The government shifted(移动) oversight(监督) and administrative(管理的) responsibilities from CNPC and Sinopec, which had been regulating(调节) themselves, to the State Economic and Trade Commission and the newly minted(刚完成的) Ministry of Land and Resources to encourage the companies to focus on management and operations. The big surprise, and seeming setback(挫折) for us, was that Zhou Yongkang was put in charge of Land and Resources, which was set up to manage China's mineral riches, granting(授予) permits for petroleum exploration and estimating(估计) and evaluating(评价) reserves. He had only taken over CNPC at the end of 1996 and had been focused on restructuring and taking it public from the get-go. But the Party had bigger plans for Zhou Yongkang.

Zhou arranged for us to meet his successor(继承者), Ma Fucai, at a lunch in mid-March. Ma shared a similar background to Zhou's. Both were petroleum industry veterans(老兵), and Ma had followed in Zhou's career(事业) footsteps(脚步). But in terms of our working relationship, Ma would prove to be quite different. Zhou was ambitious(野心勃勃的) and eager to restructure CNPC. Ma was a hands-on operator new to the world of strategy and finance. He seemed uncertain and slow to move. This did not make our team's job any easier, and he would delay the deal at numerous(许多的) stages.

Getting CNPC to market may have been the most difficult assignment(分配) that Goldman had in China during my tenure(任期). Even today Goldman veterans groan(呻吟) when they talk about the IPO of PetroChina Company, which became the name of the CNPC subsidiary(子公司) that was listed in Hong Kong and New York in April 2000. To begin with, economic conditions were inauspicious(不祥的). The dot-com bubble(气泡) was rapidly inflating(充气), and investors(投资者) had little interest in “old economy(经济)” companies, much less one in an industry wracked(严重伤害) by historically(历史上地) low prices. The PetroChina offering would also inspire the first organized protests(抗议) against a Chinese company listing in the States.

That was the world outside CNPC. Inside, the effort to reposition(复位) the company to attract investors, satisfy listing requirements, and pass muster(集合) with international regulators was nothing short of extraordinary. CNPC, like so many other state-owned enterprises, was less a company in the Western sense than a self-contained city-state(城邦), with company-provided housing, schools, hospitals, mortuaries(太平间), commissaries(代表), and police departments―all catering(给养) to the needs of more than a million workers. Disentangling(解决) this conglomeration(聚集) of essential and nonessential functions to fashion a modern public corporation was a challenge of enormous(庞大的) proportions(比例) that would test the ingenuity(心灵手巧)―and stamina(毅力)―of all involved(包含). More than a thousand professionals worked on the deal at one point or another. Goldman fielded a team of 40, twice the number it had devoted to China Telecom. They were joined by a contingent(分遣队) from CICC, consultants(顾问) from McKinsey & Company, lawyers from seven firms, and a battalion(营) of auditors(审计员) from PriceWaterhouseCoopers.

The asset swaps between the oil giants(巨人) were completed, and CNPC reincorporated(再合并) as a so-called integrated group, in June 1998. I dropped a note to CNPC's new head, Ma Fucai, congratulating him and reiterating(重申) my personal commitment(承诺) to the company's restructuring. We were working closely with CICC, but we didn't have a formal(正式的) mandate(授权), and CNPC couldn't say definitively(决定性地) when―or if―a deal would go to market. This was an all-too-typical frustration(挫折) in China; things could be in flux(流量) for months, with ministries requesting presentations and research papers on this or that aspect(方面) of a proposed deal, soliciting(征求) the analyses(分析) of competitors, going back and forth(向前) repeatedly with the State Council as its members scrutinized(细阅) and refined options. Then, all of a sudden, a decision would be reached behind closed doors, and the Chinese would want everything done in record time. You had to be on your toes, constantly probing(调查) to see where you stood, what else you could do. Your team had to be assembled(集合) and ready.

In February 1999 Ma set up an internal IPO team. It was headed by Jiang Jiemin, Ma's eventual(最后的) successor as CEO. A slight, almost gaunt(憔悴的) executive, he was gifted with great skill and decisiveness(果断) and would be more responsible than anyone on the Chinese side for getting the deal done. CNPC would need to establish(建立) a subsidiary that could be listed. Figuring out what should go into this subsidiary would be complicated(难懂的) and politically difficult. After the asset swap the now vertically integrated CNPC was an even more sprawling(蔓生的) enterprise, with a massive(大量的) oil and gas exploration and production business, refining and marketing operations, and a slew(回转) of petrochemical plants. It dominated(控制) the production and sale of crude oil and natural gas in China but needed to turn around the money-losing natural gas and chemicals businesses.

I empathized(移情) with Ma and the heads of other SOEs as they prepared for their IPOs. I was going through the same exercise myself in early 1999. After a gut-wrenching internal debate, Goldman had decided, after 130 years as a private partnership(合伙), to become a public company, and I was devoting much of my time and attention to our own IPO, which would come in May 1999.

To create PetroChina, Goldman and CICC guided CNPC executives through a painstaking(艰苦的) exercise in identifying(识别) and separating core assets from noncore assets. Core assets would be put in PetroChina; noncore would stay with CNPC, which would own 90 percent of the subsidiary and sell 10 percent to the public. Much of this exercise was fairly obvious. CNPC's social service functions made little sense in a globally competitive(竞争的) company. But separating them out wouldn't be easy to accept for employees(雇员) and executives who had come up through a system with deeply rooted expectations of cradle-to-grave(一辈子的) care. Before the onset of reform, a person's employment(使用) meant far more than a nine-to-five job and a salary. The work unit, or danwei, was the central organizing force in people's lives in urban(城市的) areas. On leaving school Chinese men and women were assigned(分配) a specific(特殊的) workplace for life; they were fed, housed, and given social and medical services there. They needed permission from work to travel, marry, and have children. Over the years competition from private companies had eroded(腐蚀) the system, but it remained in place at state-owned enterprises, which were, as a result, weighed down by excess(额外的) employees, immense(巨大的) financial obligations(义务), and management distractions(注意力分散).

Such inefficiencies(效率低) were what Zhu Rongji and his fellow reformers sought to eliminate(消除), and they were prepared to endure(忍耐) the short-term pain that would accompany(陪伴) reorganizations(改组) and forced layoffs. I can only imagine how disruptive(破坏的) and wrenching(扭伤) this process must have been for workers, their bosses, and the country as a whole. While liberating for those able to take advantage of new opportunities(时机), it had to have been terrifying for laid-off(被解雇的) and older workers―especially since China had only a rudimentary(基本的), government-sponsored social security system. CNPC alone was responsible for some 1.5 million active workers and their families―perhaps 6 million people in all. By contrast(对比), global oil giant BP employed about 80,000 people in 1999. The clear implication(含义) was that CNPC would need to shed(流出) hundreds of thousands of workers to begin to be competitive. Yet CNPC officials were understandably(可理解地) reluctant(不情愿的) to lay workers off. PetroChina would eventually keep approximately(大约) 480,000 workers. It targeted an ambitious goal of cutting $1 billion, or 8 percent of costs, within two years and projected a workforce reduction(减少) of 50,000 by 2002.

CNPC's numbers only hint(暗示) at the dimension(维) of the problem for the country. The statistics(统计) on state employment and layoffs are squishy(粘糊糊的) for that period, but the International Monetary Fund, for one, estimated in 2004 that the state-owned sector shed more than 40 million jobs between 1990 and 2001.

These workers received meager(贫乏的) severance(分离) pay, and the vast majority of them were unable to find new employment. Their hardships were severe(严峻的) and in many ways grossly(很) unfair. That these disruptions(破坏) produced a market-based system that lifted hundreds of millions out of poverty(贫困) was cold comfort to those who weren't equipped to deal with this new world. Many would later come back demanding more money, often in noisy protests, and the companies generally paid to keep peace, but Zhu Rongji and his team of reformers, backed by President Jiang Zemin, were determined to press ahead on SOE reforms, despite(尽管) the pain and political risk(风险) involved. They knew that the iron rice bowl crippled(削弱) the companies' efficiency(效率) and China's prospects.

CNPC's social service functions were easy enough to identify(确定), but they accounted for only part of the excess(额外的) staffing(安置职工). Another factor(因素) was that just about every operation was done in-house―dozens of functions, from surveying(测量) and drilling to construction and engineering. This no doubt reflected(反映) the legacy(遗赠) of self-sufficiency(自给自足), as well as the fact that before reform(改革), no private marketplace existed in which companies could be formed to compete to supply these services. Outside of China major oil companies outsourced(把…外包) most similar functions, reducing overhead and other expenses.

The idea was that PetroChina would leave the noncore functions and business operations with CNPC. In time CNPC would turn the social services over to the central government, which had agreed to gradually assume(承担) these obligations(义务); senior officials were pushing reluctant(不情愿的), financially(财政上) strapped(用带捆绑) local governments to share, and eventually(最后) take over, the burden(负担). PetroChina meantime(其时) would contract(收缩) with parent company CNPC to provide the services it needed for a fee.

A number of well-known(著名的) and well-regarded operations didn't fit with the new PetroChina. Among those were certain international exploration(探测) and production assets(资产), as well as the iconic(图标的) drilling operations made famous by Iron Man Wang. For historical(历史的) and sentimental(感伤的) reasons, this was a controversial(有争议的) decision, but multinational energy companies like Exxon and BP Amoco were not in the drilling business, either, as our bankers noted and as Ma and company learned in their investigations(调查) and meetings.

PetroChina acquired(获得) some of the most attractive assets from CNPC, including oil and gas exploration and production, refining(精炼) and marketing operations, and the petrochemical(石油化学产品) business. PetroChina would also own the prized Daqing oil fields, as well as pipelines(管道) that transported 84 percent of China's natural gas. It would control more than 70 percent of China's proven(证明) oil and gas reserves and two-thirds(三分之二) of its 1998 production.

Meeting the stringent(严厉的) U.S. accounting and regulatory(管理的) standards necessary to do the listing was not easy. The Securities and Exchange Commission required five years of accounts, and its demands sent U.S.-trained analysts(分析者) off to Manchurian oil fields to pull files, when they could find them, to put together such things as depreciation(折旧) schedules(时间表). We, along with PriceWaterhouseCoopers, had to answer hundreds of SEC questions concerning(关于) accounting decisions that had been taken. One issue related to reserves―a key measure for energy companies. We had hired a respected consulting(查阅) firm to do an international standard reserve estimate(估计)―the first ever for China's reserves.

It took weeks to hear from the SEC. We finally did, but it was the eve of the Chinese New Year, when just about everyone in China disappears to return to their hometowns. The SEC was unhappy that PetroChina was required to renew(更新) its production permits annually(每年) with the Chinese government. The requirement, though a formality(礼节), created uncertainty(不确定). What if regulators(调整者) suddenly denied(否定) the renewal(更新)? PetroChina's reserves would be worthless.

We had to get a government waiver(弃权) from the Chinese right away. We couldn't wait until after the holiday, and we lacked high-level contacts at the Ministry of Land and Resources―Zhou Yongkang had left to become Party secretary of Sichuan in 1999. In an amazing feat(功绩) given that all of China was on holiday, one of CICC's top bankers managed to find an official who, with a little coaxing(哄), processed the request on New Year's Day. The banker was Jinyong Cai, a World Bank veteran(老兵的) and graduate of Peking University with a Ph.D. in economics(经济学) from Boston University, who had joined from Morgan Stanley during the past year. The waiver was subsequently(随后) signed by Wen Jiabao, then vice(副的) premier(总理) (and future premier), whose economics portfolio(公文包) included the Ministry of Land and Resources. The SEC gave us the green light, so the IPO could move forward.

The PetroChina offering had to contend(竞争) with a host of obstacles(障碍). Asia was still recovering from the 1997 crisis(危机). China's economy(经济) had softened, with GDP growth dipping(浸渍) to 7.6 percent in 1999 from 9.3 percent in 1997. Hong KongClisted H-shares were underperforming(运作差于), while the Internet stock market frenzy(狂暴) had reached full cry. Although oil prices were on the rise―from $10 a barrel(桶) in 1998, they would reach $27 a barrel in February 2000―energy was viewed as stodgy(平凡的) and unappealing(无吸引力的). In October 1999 China National Offshore Oil had been forced to pull a planned $2.5 billion IPO that was being led by one of our competitors in difficult market conditions. The PetroChina offering simply had to succeed. A second failed IPO would be globally embarrassing(使人尴尬的) and demonstrate(证明) a lack of confidence in China and its energy sector(部门). For PetroChina's Ma it would also mean the end of his career(事业).

We devised(设计) features(特色) to appeal(呼吁) to the market. Investors(投资者) would naturally wonder whether a Communist state-owned relic(遗迹) could actually change its habits and follow through on all of its promises. So we encouraged the company to put in place an innovative(革新的) incentive(动机) compensation(补偿) structure(结构). In a groundbreaking(动工) move for China that would set a precedent(先例) for other SOEs, PetroChina granted(授予) stock options to 300 senior executives(经理) and designed an incentive package for more junior managers. Some 70 to 75 percent of senior managers' pay would be contingent(不一定的) on meeting performance targets linked to net profits(利润), return on capital, and cost reductions(减少). PetroChina also set explicit(明确的) financial targets for each business segment(段). Since most of the variable(变量的) compensation came from stock ownership, the interests of shareholders(股东) and executives were aligned(结盟).

To help anchor(抛锚) the offering, we followed the China Telecom model and recruited(招聘) several cornerstone(基础) investors, who agreed to purchase(购买) $350 million of shares and hold them for a minimum(最小值) of six months. All of the investors, including K. S. Li, had also been investors in China Telecom.

We added another wrinkle(皱纹), inviting in a major strategic(战略上的) investor as well. The idea was not just to raise capital, but to help PetroChina forge(熔炉) a relationship with a world-class oil company whose experience, management know-how(诀窍), and technical skills it could tap. This approach(方法) was another first for China. The government would welcome strategic investors in subsequent major offerings, most notably(显著地) in banking.

The oil company was BP Amoco, whose CEO, John Browne, we knew well. He had joined the board of Goldman as part of our own IPO in May 1999. The British concern was completing its acquisition(获得物) of Atlantic Richfield (ARCO), which would significantly(意味深长地) hike(提高) its Asian oil reserves. Browne had been eyeballing(盯住看) China for some time. I flew to London and met up with Mike Evans. We went to see Browne at his offices and ran through our proposal(提议).

It was not an easy sell. BP had recently taken a $200 million write-down(帐面价值的故意降低) on an investment(投资) in a venture(企业) to develop a huge Siberian gas field in 1999, and Browne was wary(谨慎的) of making a commitment(承诺).

“Is this deal going to get done?” Browne asked. “And is it going to be successful?”

When we assured(保证) him it would be, he responded(回答), “That's good, because I can't afford to have another failure.”

Our bankers were eager for CNPC to reach an agreement with BP before the road shows began. But BP wasn't in quite the same hurry and wanted to be sure it got its money's worth. Browne proposed(建议) that his company be permitted to get into the retail(零售的) fuel business in the prosperous(繁荣的) southern Chinese provinces in return for a sizable(相当大的) stake(桩) in the IPO. There was a problem, however. China was at a critical(鉴定的) stage in its application for entry to the World Trade Organization. Although CNPC was willing to cut a deal, BP's ask was far ahead of what would be permitted by the schedule China had agreed to under its WTO agreement.

We completed the London road show without BP's agreement. Investor interest was tepid(微温的). BP had still not agreed to invest(投资) as we were about to begin marketing in New York. Ma Fucai was getting nervous. He didn't want PetroChina to falter(支吾) as the IPO for CNOOC had.

CNPC needed to provide a government guarantee(保证) that BP would be able to acquire the gas stations it wanted, despite(尽管) China's pending(悬而未决) WTO application. Ma was able to track down Vice Premier Wu Bangguo, who oversaw(看管) the state-owned enterprises, and explain the situation. Wu agreed to provide a letter of support and asked CNPC's team to prepare one for him. A draft(草稿) with language approving(批准) a gas station deal was hurriedly faxed to him.

The next morning a reply came from the vice premier, but it was ambiguous(模糊不清的): He didn't explicitly say CNPC could sell the gas stations to BP. Instead, he noted that once China got into the WTO it would be more open to such deals. Browne accepted this vague(模糊的) pledge(保证) and agreed to buy up to 20 percent of the shares sold in the offering. That would eventually come to just under $600 million. In the end, though it took time, BP would form a joint(共同的) venture with PetroChina for 500 gas stations in Guangdong by 2007.

That was living on the edge, China style, but that was how you had to operate. In China you frequently had to work in a gray area. Deals often had to be completed before the country, reinventing(重新使用) an entire economy on the fly, had put in place laws and regulations that had not been necessary in the days of centrally controlled planning. You had to take it on faith that the Chinese would live up to their word and deliver, even if they could not, for one reason or another, put something in writing as precisely(精确地) as you had hoped. It was then and remains to a great extent(程度) today a nation ruled by men, not laws. Trust and face were uppermost(至上的): you had to trust that if the Chinese committed(犯罪) to doing something, they would deliver, even if they danced around the point. In dealing with China's most senior government and business leaders for two decades(十年) now, it has been my experience that they have come through, without fail, when it was in their best interest to do so. Making sure PetroChina's IPO succeeded clearly was. For its part BP understood correctly that China needed Western know-how and capital, and that it wasn't in its interest to mislead its foreign partners.

The agreement from BP was crucial(重要的), because the underwriting(保险业) had sparked(发动) an outcry(强烈抗议). Protests(抗议) had started in the fall of 1999, when word of the CNPC offering began to appear in the press. The first came from religious groups denouncing(谴责) CNPC's activities in Sudan(苏丹). In addition to wells and drilling rights, CNPC owned 40 percent of Sudan's Greater Nile Oil Project, the country's main exploration(探测) and production arm. The U.S. had imposed(利用) sanctions(制裁) on Sudan in 1997 for its support of international terrorism(恐怖主义) and its poor human rights record. Activists(积极分子) argued that the Sudanese government would use oil revenues(税收) to fund its civil war against Christians and animists(万物有灵论者) in the southern part of the country. They protested that the IPO proceeds(收入) would help to finance the government's actions.

We impressed upon the Chinese the seriousness(严重性) of this criticism(批评) and worked to separate the new company from the taint(污点) of Sudan. It was named PetroChina to distinguish(区分) it from its parent, and Sudanese operations were left, along with noncore assets(资产), at CNPC. Additionally(附加的), we set up accounting firewalls(防火墙) and tracking mechanisms(机制) to ensure(保证) that the IPO proceeds would not be used in Sudan.

I wasn't entirely satisfied with the structure(结构) of a listed company that was overwhelmingly(压倒性地) owned by a state-owned enterprise under the control of the Chinese Communist Party. That's one reason we insisted on setting up such tight financial(金融的) controls between the parent company and PetroChina. But I saw this solution(解决方案) as a pragmatic(实际的) first step that would subject much of the company's operations to public scrutiny(详细审查) and tough international capital market standards. Because so many Chinese economic(经济的) experiments were widely imitated(模仿的), I believed the deal would lay down a blueprint(蓝图) that would simplify(简化) and speed up the process of badly needed reform(改革) for many other industrial(工业的) SOEs. I expected that the PetroChina IPO would be followed by public listings of the other viable(可行的) businesses left behind at CNPC, once management had gained experience running a public company and the Chinese were able to see how the discipline(学科) of the market and the pressure to meet the expectations of new shareholders(股东) led to a more successful company. I believed, as I'm sure Zhu Rongji did, that over time the Party's controlling ownership in publicly listed SOEs would become more passive in nature, with the government no longer interfering(干涉) as much in business decisions or conferring(授予) special advantages that would impede(阻碍) the evolution(演变) of competitive(竞争的) market-driven companies.

Meanwhile, the protests against the deal grew. Environmentalists(环保人士) concerned(涉及) about Tibet, and union members, led by the AFL-CIO, joined in. The protests were a dress rehearsal(排演) for a last-ditch(最后防线的) fight by labor leaders and other opponents(对手) to prevent China's admission to the World Trade Organization. China had first applied to join the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs, the WTO's predecessor(前任), in 1986; the United States and China had achieved a critical(鉴定的) breakthrough(突破) in November 1999, agreeing on terms of a WTO pact. Now President Bill Clinton had to persuade Congress to give China permanent(永久的) access to U.S. markets rather than continuing to subject the country to an annual(年度的) review that generally featured(起重要作用) activists agitating(摇动) against Beijing. WTO opponents, who had violently disrupted(破坏) the organization's meetings in Seattle in December, meant to use PetroChina as part of their campaign(运动) to persuade Congress to reject the president's overtures(前奏曲).

Union leaders railed against working conditions in China and tried a new tactic(策略), expanding(扩张) from labor and human rights issues to pan the deal on its investment(投资) merits(优点). An AFL-CIO report contended(竞争) that the Sudan concerns, expected worker layoffs(裁员), and the company's governance(管理) structure posed(造成) financial risks(风险) to investors(投资者). Meantime(其时), U.S. sanctions against Sudan caused a number of pension funds, including TIAA-CREF and the California Public Employees' Retirement System, to announce that they would not buy shares.

The campaign put us in a tough spot. I understood these concerns and why some investors would not buy shares. To begin with, I didn't much like the structure of separating the listed company from a holding company that continued to do business in an opaque(不透明的) manner. And I certainly didn't approve(批准) of the repugnant(讨厌的) actions of the Sudanese government. But I have never been an all-or-nothing(孤注一掷的) person. I will take half a loaf if it leads to more progress. And I believed that a public offering for a large part of the business did just that. I felt that the deal would jump-start needed reform in a vital(至关重要的) sector(部门) of the Chinese economy(经济) and would lead in time to the rest of CNPC's assets being privatized(私有化) and subjected to the scrutiny and discipline of public shareholders. I believed it was important to continue to encourage China to integrate(完整) its economy with the world's, to open its markets and endorse(背书) free trade.

Because the IPO was in an SEC-designated “quiet period,” we could not comment on the accusations(控告) in the press. Behind the scenes we did our best to counter the criticism. Goldman chief of staff(职员的) John Rogers took an active role, explaining the safeguards(保护) in the deal to key figures in the Clinton administration(管理). Before joining Goldman he had been undersecretary(副部长) of State and knew his way around Washington. He was a convincing(令人信服的) advocate(提倡者) for the view that reform was causing a sea change in China that would better life there and improve relations with America and the world. Despite(尽管) efforts by members of Congress to lobby(对…进行游说) the Clinton administration to intervene(干涉), the Treasury and State Departments did not get involved(包含).

From a human rights standpoint(立场), I believed strongly that China's embrace(拥抱) of markets over central planning would inevitably(不可避免地) lead to more economic and political freedom there. As I wrote after the IPO in an op-ed article published in the New York Times, “The case for permanent normal trade relations with China is the story of PetroChina repeated a hundredfold(百倍) or a thousandfold(千倍地).… The individual(个人的) freedom, initiative(主动权), and responsibility(责任) inherent(内在的) in free markets are, by their very nature, at odds(几率) with authoritarian(独裁主义的) rule.”

Progress has been slow in China, but I still believe this today.

We needed to raise at least $2 billion from investors to satisfy the requirements in Hong Kong for how much of a company's shares had to be available to the investing(熔模铸造) public. In the early days of discussing a PetroChina IPO, there was talk of raising upward of $5 billion. But even after BP finally signed on, we were getting only a lukewarm(冷淡的) response from investors. By March 14, 2000, we had cut back the target of PetroChina's IPO to between $2.8 billion and $3.4 billion. It was not clear we could raise even that much.

Ma Fucai did not appear to be happy, and I could understand why. He was under a great deal of pressure. He'd been a bit hesitant(迟疑的) about the deal to begin with, and now he had to worry about letting down the Chinese leadership(领导能力). At one point he delayed for hours a team of bankers about to fly to Hong Kong to start the road show, to argue again about the price range for the offering, which we had recommended be lowered to reflect(反映) the soft demand. Ma seemed reluctant(不情愿的) to authorize(批准) this change.

“I cannot sell state assets like that,” one banker recalls(召回) him saying at the time. “I just cannot do this.”

The process of putting the deal together was so intense(强烈的) and difficult, and Ma came under so much pressure, that communication issues led to a breakdown(故障) in trust during the negotiations(谈判). Ma would prove an obstacle(障碍) at the very last minute, when it came time to determine the final price at which we would sell PetroChina's shares to the public on March 30. The pricing meeting took place in our offices in New York, with senior management from CNPC and PetroChina, senior bankers from CICC, and our team. The discussions started at 7:30 p.m. We figured it would be a short meeting. It was clear to us, because of the light demand, that we would have to set the price near the low end of the price range of HK$1.24 to HK$1.51. The indications(指示) we were getting from big institutions were closer to HK$1.28―and we weren't even sure that price would stick.

Ma Fucai thought it would be a black mark against him for the deal to be priced so low, and he resisted signing off. I wound up going home a couple of hours in, asking Mike Evans to call me when the decision was finalized(完成). I never got the call: the meeting did not end until 5:30 the next morning. There was a lot of arguing among the CNPC and CICC officials in Chinese; I am told the Chinese word for “traitor(叛徒)” was tossed(投掷) around liberally(大方地). Around 2:00 a.m. Ma fell asleep on the conference room table, and it was up to Jiang Jiemin, the executive(经理) whom the government had appointed(任命) to oversee the IPO, to carry on.

“Your chairman's gone to sleep,” Mike told Jiang. “You and I have worked for two years on this transaction(交易). This is the only price the deal works at. You have to trust me that this is what we've got to do.”

At last Jiang Jiemin agreed. When Ma awoke, he reluctantly accepted the decision, but Goldman Sachs would remain in his doghouse(狗窝) for years to come.

The PetroChina restructuring(调整) was a difficult, even ugly, but absolutely(绝对地) necessary event for China. Fifteen years after its IPO, which raised $2.9 billion, PetroChina ranks as the biggest oil producer among listed companies in the world, having passed ExxonMobil in 2011. Its market capitalization(资本化) briefly topped $1 trillion(万亿), when its yuan-denominated shares debuted(初次登台) in Shanghai in 2007, ranking it as the biggest company in the world by market cap. PetroChina earned more than $21 billion in 2013, compared with $3.3 billion in 1999.

In reorganizing(整理) and revitalizing(复活) state-owned enterprises like PetroChina to make them more competitive, the Chinese were willing to endure(忍耐) the loss of tens of millions of jobs. The immediate result was pain, dislocation(转位), and instability(不稳定). Longer term, many SOEs that went public became bigger, stronger, and more efficient(有效率的), contributing(贡献) to the country's rapidly growing economy. But reform efforts stalled(停止) in the early 2000s, and the performance and business practices of China's best-run SOEs still badly lag those of their global competitors.

Many still feel the pain of their restructurings. Laid-off(被解雇的) workers at PetroChina and CNPC were given severance(分离) payments(付款), but by 2002, when their money had run out, they came back to the companies demanding more. Widespread protests and riots(暴乱) followed in Daqing and other locations. A similar story played out at Sinopec, which also did an IPO in 2000, and dozens of other restructured state-owned enterprises in the country, presenting a difficult challenge for them and the political leadership. Many SOEs responded(回答) by making additional payments and agreeing to rehire(重新雇用) former workers to keep the peace while continuing to find ways to grow their businesses. As recently as 2012, when disaffected(不满的) workers laid off during the run-up to the 2000 Sinopec IPO threatened(威胁) to protest in Beijing, company chairman Fu Chengyu agreed to increase the pensions of 200,000 workers or put them back on his “inactive(不活跃的)” payroll(工资单). Fu concluded that these workers had been treated unfairly and were living in great hardship. In the end, no matter how well designed or generous(慷慨的) company packages might have been, China lacked, and continues to lack, a well-funded, nationwide pension and social safety net. This remains an urgent(紧急的) task for the country to address.

